My Master

My Master





Parthasarathi Rajagopalachari


Shri Ram Chandra Mission


Manapakkam, Chennai – 600 116, India

©Copyright reserved Shri Ram Chandra Mission Manapakkam, Chennai – 600 116

Published under license by

Spiritual Hierarchy Publication Trust

“Divine Bliss”

North Block, 2/3, Judges Court Road, Kolkata - 700 027

First Edition



1986

Second Edition



2010 10,000 Copies

ISBN 978-93-80335-48-3 (Soft Bound) 978-93-80335-50-6 (Hard Bound)

Printer:

Sudarshan Graphics

Chennai, India.

Contents

Foreword............................................................ vii Part I — The Master

1. The First Exposure ............................................... 3

2. The Environment .............................................. 15

3. Tolerance........................................................... 26

4. Duty ................................................................. 41

5. Love .................................................................. 63

Part II — His Teaching and Work 6. The Way of the Spirit ........................................ 81

7. Approach to Reality ......................................... 103

8. The Role of the Guru ....................................... 122

9. Spiritual Experiences ....................................... 149

10.The Gift of Liberation



...................................... 158

Postscript........................................................... 177

Foreword

In the postscript to the previous editions of this book, I have related an experience which led to the writing of this book in 1974. It was the result of what I believe to have been an inner command from my Master, from within me. I shall now try to relate what happened earlier to that, which may explain why the command of the Master was issued to me.

My Master had been seriously ill in the early part of the year 1974, and had to be finally hospitalised in Lucknow, where he lay in deep coma for almost one month. In view of his advanced age—he being 75 years old then—there were deep, though unexpressed, fears that the end may not be long. It was very much of a miracle to most of us when he regained consciousness, and then went on to regain his health.

It was my privilege to have been with him for part of the time he was hospitalised. I also went to Shahjahanpur after he was discharged from the hospital in Lucknow, and stayed with him for many days till he was relatively in better health, after his month long ordeal. It was then that he revealed to me that he had chosen me to be his spiritual representative, to eventually succeed him as the President of the Mission, whenever that became necessary. Those were, for me, very moving days, driving me to tears from moment to moment. Those were the blessed days when his gentle and deeply abiding love

Foreword

flowed upon me, over me, like a spring drizzle under blazing sunshine. Those were also the days of the most personal intimacy between us, when there seemed to be nothing at all between us, excepting our two identities.

It was as if he had removed all barriers between ourselves, and we were blissfully together in a oneness that would perhaps be difficult to experience later.

It was a time of the greatest happiness for me, and, rather surprisingly, the time of the greatest sorrow for me too, for it was then that I had to face the certain knowledge that one day my beloved would leave me to go into the Brighter World. This knowledge almost broke my heart. He could of course divine it at a glance, and he would gently chide me for such thoughts, saying,

“I shall be with you for many more years. Do not worry about it now. Mrs. Davies had told me that I shall live till 2006 or 2007, and others have also told me the same thing. So don’t cry now. I shall be with you for a long time. One day we all shall have to go. But I repeat, it is very far off.” Thus he would chide me and comfort me.

But nevertheless, I could not bear to think of the time when he would not be with me, and thus began for me the hidden sorrow in my heart, which has never left me, and which, in 1983, became the stark and devastating reality that shall haunt me for the rest of my life.

This knowledge made me brood over what I should do to try to show my love for him, and to express my gratitude to him, for the gifts of his love that I have received were no small gifts! This made me brood all the time about what I should do, with the result that an inner pressure was steadily built up in my heart, and the need became obsessive. It was in this frame of mind and heart that I was in Madurai—and there the miracle viii

Foreword

occurred, of his inner instruction to me, resulting in the writing of this book.

It is my conviction that such an inner pressure has to be built up, by our own effort, and then his help crystallises within us, and then all becomes possible.

Love for him alone can make this possible.





P. Rajagopalachari


8th March 1989, Bangalore

ix

Part I





The Master


“I am a Lamp to thee who beholdest Me, I am a Mirror to thee who perceivest Me, I am a Door to thee who knockest at Me, I am a Way to thee a wayfarer.”

(Hymn of Jesus, from

The Apocalyptic Acts of John)

1





The First Exposure


I was drawn into the Mission at the end of March 1964

by Shri Vira Raghavan, preceptor-in-charge of the Madras centre. Before I joined this great organisation I had not even heard its name! Shri Vira Raghavan and my father had become friends through a common interest in homoeopathy. Shri Vira Raghavan used to visit us occasionally, generally to have a medical look at my son and to offer advice for treatment on those occasions when he fell sick. My contact with him then was quite tenuous, being restricted to polite exchanges of greetings.

One day in February (a very fortunate one for me!) Shri Vira Raghavan happened to see some of the books I was interested in—yoga, psychology, philosophy, mysticism, et cetera. He said, “Since you are interested in this sort of thing, why don’t you try a practical approach?” I answered that I had done a few things for quite some years but, lacking guidance, I had given up practical pursuit of yogic sadhana.

Then Shri Vira Raghavan said, “A few of us sit together and meditate. If you are interested you can join us and try out our method.” I accepted instantly. My father joined the ‘sitting’ the very next Sunday, which happened to be Vasant Panchami day. My induction was

My Master

however delayed by several weeks since I had to leave Madras on official work.

At that time Shri Vira Raghavan did not make any specific mention of Master, or tell us of the importance of the Master in this system of yoga. All that we saw was a photograph at which I, for one, glanced just casually.

There was no particular impact other than a mental idea,

“Oh! This is the person who guides the students. Very good!” Shri Vira Raghavan told us that this gentleman from Shahjahanpur had come the previous year, but we were not then made aware of his visit. Shri Vira Raghavan told us that we had been informed, albeit casually, of his visit the previous year. I then recollected Shri Vira Raghavan telling us the previous year that his acharya had come to Madras, and he would therefore be busy for a few days until his acharya left. At that time we had taken him to mean that his Vaishnav acharya had come to pay a visit. Regrettably, Shri Vira Raghavan had not enlightened us fully then, so that one precious opportunity of meeting the Master face to face had been irretrievably lost. Nevertheless, at the time we joined the Mission, this loss was not really felt since we had as yet no idea of the Master. This sense of loss was to come later.

During the middle of 1964 I had to go to Bareilly on official work, and thence to Lucknow. I actually passed through Shahjahanpur but I did not have the address of the Mission Headquarters with me, nor did I bother to try and locate the Mission to have Master’s darshan.

Thus a second opportunity was lost, this time by my own lack of interest.

Within a few months the first sign of Master’s grace came in the shape of another call to go to Bareilly, again 4

The First Exposure on company work. After completing my work at Bareilly I proceeded to Shahjahanpur on a Saturday afternoon, leaving my colleagues behind at Bareilly, promising to be back the same evening. I arrived at Shahjahanpur at about 3:00 pm, halted arbitrarily at an intersection, and asked for directions on how to get to Master’s place.

I was directed by the traffic constable to a sweetmeat seller a hundred yards away. The sweetmeat stall owner gave me further directions and I found myself at Master’s residence, the ‘ashram’ as it is generally called, just a few minutes later! It had all been so direct and so simple.

I entered the ashram and requested an interview with the Master. I was told that he was resting, but that I could go into his room and sit down there, taking care not to disturb his rest. I found Master on a low bed, lying facing the wall with his back to me. This was my first view of the Master. He was lying on his right side with his knees drawn up, and looked very small and unimpressive as a human person. My first feeling was one of disappointment. “What?” I thought, “Is this the man who is going to lead me to my goal? It looks as if he himself could do with some help in even moving around physically. How then is he going to help me?”

For the next half hour my thought followed this strain.

It is no secret to say that I was quite disappointed and wished I had not come so far, alone, to see him.

As my thoughts came to this dismal conclusion he suddenly turned round, fully awake, and I saw his face.

He stared at me, seeming to look right through me, and I stared back at him, rather impolitely I am afraid.

I introduced myself as an abhyasi of the Madras centre.

He then sat up, back and head bent slightly forward, his body resting on his two hands which held the edge 5

My Master

of the cot. He seemed to be ruminating over some inner thought. He appeared to be absorbed, and his face had a rather sombre expression on it. After a few moments he looked up at me again, and I saw his eyes. They are the deepest eyes I have ever seen. Generally human eyes seem to have a backdrop, a limit to transparency. Some eyes are even totally opaque, and one sees nothing but the outer surface of the cornea. In Master, the eyes are completely transparent, and seem to point the way to another world lying behind them. When one looks into Master’s eyes, it is as if one is looking up into a clear, blue sky. The gaze goes on and on, limitlessly and forever, without an end to penetration. Master’s eyes seem to contain all space and all creation within them.

That look won me over. I could now well believe the Puranic stories of Yashoda seeing the whole world in Shri Krishna’s baby mouth! I knew immediately and intuitively that I had found the person who alone could be my Master, and lead me to my goal.

Master slowly stood up and went out of the room on to the verandah, and looked around as if searching for something. He then asked me where my luggage was. I told him that I had left my bag in the car on the main road. Without even asking me about my plans he sent someone to bring the car around, to unload my suitcase, and to put it in the room next to the one he had been occupying, all of which was done, thus making my plans for me! He then asked someone else to get me a cup of tea together with something to eat.

After this he went into his inner apartments, the family quarters as I found out subsequently, brought a towel, and laid it on the platform near the well which was, in those days, the only source of water. The well had 6

The First Exposure a hand-pump by which water was pumped out. He put a bucket under the spout and pumped it full of water.

After this he came and sat in his chair, smiled, for the first time, and said, “Please have your bath, the water is ready.” My first reaction was one of chagrin that I had permitted an old man, far above my years, to draw my bath for me. The next one was of something I can hardly give expression to, even today. It was a conglomerate of emotions, of gratitude, awe, and love all mixed up together, along with a lot of shame in it. Shame because I had stood by and watched him pumping away to fill the bucket, imagining he was filling it up for himself, and had not offered to help him at all! All along I had wanted to go and do the pumping, but my shyness had prevented this. Anyway, I had my bath as instructed, just by the well in the open, as the ashram had no bathroom in those days.

By then the tea had arrived and I refreshed myself.

After this I just sat on the verandah, while the Master kept at his own routine, frequently getting up to go inside the house to give instructions to the household staff and so on. Master also introduced me to the first person I had met when I entered the ashram, Shri Ishwar Sahai, whom I discovered to be Master’s personal assistant and permanent companion.

Master had assumed I would stay the night, and I did not tell him I had to go back the same evening. I did not inform him of my plan, lacking the courage to do so. So I just sat and sat, waiting for something to happen. At about seven o’clock Master went inside the house, and almost immediately came out to ask me whether I ate onions. I answered that I did not. I was puzzled by this question, but assumed that it had some relationship to 7

My Master

spiritual practice. He then went in again, stayed away for some fifteen minutes, and then returned to his easy chair on the verandah. At about eight o’clock someone came and whispered something to him. He immediately got up and said, “Come, your dinner is ready. Please eat it. I have arranged to have some curd brought for you, knowing that South Indians are accustomed to have it at all their meals.” I had not expected this but meekly followed him and ate my meal.

After finishing dinner I asked permission to leave.

Master appeared surprised. He said, “You have just arrived, and you have come from such a long distance.

Can you not stay at least another day?” The invitation to stay was so genuine and affectionate that I could do nothing but respond to it. A few other persons had assembled by this time, all local disciples of Master. We sat around him in a loose circle, but were mostly silent.

Occasionally Master made some remark and lapsed into silence again. The evening wore on in this desultory fashion until finally, around ten o’clock, feeling quite sleepy, I went to bed.

It was, as I found out by later experience of the Master’s daily routine, a rather unusual day. Master is generally a charming and vivacious conversationalist, capable of immense humour and wit. He often lapses into periods of taciturnity, but these are few and of short duration. On such occasions he is totally withdrawn, and appears to be far away in another world. But when he speaks he has the gift of presenting his profound philosophical thought in the form of easy dialogue which even a totally unlettered person can understand and assimilate into his being, and apply in his workaday 8

The First Exposure life. But all this was yet to come my way in my own personal experience.

This first day with Master was to me still something of a disappointment because he had hardly addressed a dozen words to me—and those too of practically no spiritual significance whatsoever. All that he had exposed to me of himself was his gracious courtesy and hospitality as a householder. But one important feature or characteristic I did notice was that in Master this appeared entirely natural, and was patently sincere and fundamental to his nature. There was no ostentation, no sense of unnaturalness, no feeling of being patronised. On the contrary, there was a spontaneity in his behaviour as a host that made it as natural as it is for the sun to shine, or for water to wet. For the first time in my life I felt myself to be in the presence of the perfect householder who could be a host to his guest without appearing to be one; who could serve his visitor with humility but without any taint of servility; and who could be a Master to the disciple without the vainglorious and arrogant pomp and bluster that, in India at least, seems to be almost essential prerequisites for the assumption of such elevated positions, particularly in the religious hierarchies.

I have been exposed to the presence of many many persons who were reputed to be great souls, sannyasis, saints and so on. My professional career has involved a great deal of travel all over India, and on those official journeys I have had opportunities galore for such encounters. But rarely have I met a ‘guru’ of even the lowest situation in his own hierarchy where the gurudom had not been tainted by arrogance of manner, ostentation in personal presentation, glibness in making 9

My Master

a multitude of promises, and avarice in collecting the disciple's gift. Here, in Shahjahanpur, I had for the first time come across a guru who was simple, direct, unostentatious and unassuming; who made no demands of any kind and yet offered not only the supreme spiritual service of liberation but personal physical service to the abhyasi too. This was, to me, an enigma of shattering proportions and entirely out of tune with the guru of the common run in the Indian environment. So it is not to be wondered at that I went to bed with a welter of confused impressions and thoughts.

I didn’t sleep very well that night. There was a large painting of the Grand Master, Lalaji Saheb, on the wall next to my bed, and I had the peculiar impression that he was staring down at me. This made me quite nervous and restless. I kept tossing and turning, and, even in the dark, I continued to feel Lalaji’s penetrating eyes boring into me, penetrating through to my very soul, as it were. I woke up early in the morning and was ready by 6:00 am. I found no one about as yet. By the side of Master’s easy chair on the verandah a hookah had been prepared ready for him. I learnt that Babuji, as the Master is affectionately called, began his day with the hookah.

True enough he appeared at 7:00 am, went straight to his chair, and began pulling away at the hookah. It took some time for the hookah to ‘smoke’ properly.

All this time he was sitting relaxed, completely silent, with a far away look in his eyes. He had a glass of milk halfway through. When the hookah was smoked out he went into the office room, opened his medicine kit, and took out a bottle of oil which he proceeded to apply 10

The First Exposure to his scalp, rubbing the oil in with vigorous hand movements. He then went for his bath, returning a short while later dressed in his usual fashion in a dhoti with a hand-stitched cloth banian (vest) covering his upper body. When he wants to be formal he wears a kurta.

On public occasions he wears a long coat, coming down to his knees, buttoned up all the way to his neck, and sports a white cap. Occasionally he wears pyjamas too.

This represents the complete range of his attire.

Master is very fair in complexion and, though short and spare, is extraordinarily handsome with his beautiful beard. His hands are very expressive, and he uses them often in making frequent gestures during conversation.

His feet are very soft and the soles particularly so, being as soft as the petals of a flower. Touching them, one can well understand how the term ‘lotus feet’ came into existence. Master’s feet are really lotus feet in their softness and healthy pink colour.

Master speaks fluently in Hindi, Urdu and English.

His English is direct and exact. I have never known Master use an ambiguous word or phrase, either in conversation or in correspondence. He is one of that very rare breed of persons who say what they mean, and mean precisely what they say. When questioned he gives immediate and considered answers in a most benevolent manner, making the questioner happy that he has asked a question. I noticed that while Master welcomed questions, he preferred them to be such as concern an individual personally. Master generally dislikes purely theoretical questions seeking merely knowledge rather than advice.

Master is a great artist in the matter of avoiding controversy. I found in him a genuine humility when he 11

My Master

disclaimed all knowledge of other systems of thought, philosophy, et cetera, but simultaneously, he was as firm as a mountain where knowledge arising out of his own experience of yoga was concerned. Here he was the Master in every sense of the term, prepared to prove his contention or point by practical demonstration rather than by verbose discussion. I had a demonstration of this trait in him when someone asked about a particular spiritual state. Master smiled and answered, “I cannot explain it to you but, if your samskaras will permit it, I can give you the experience of that condition.” In making this slight reservation Master was not hedging. This was but one more example of his deep-rooted humility. He rarely claims outright to be able to do anything. One of his stock statements is, “By my Master’s grace all things can be done. After all he is the doer. If Lalaji wishes, this thing can be done in a moment.”

Even on this first visit I found in Master this deep, personal, spiritual attachment to his own Master Lalaji, and a sense of total dependence on him seemed to be there. At first this was slightly confusing to me. “After all,” I thought, “he is a Master. Why then does he seem so dependent on Lalaji? Does it indicate a personal sense of weakness? Or does he merely use Lalaji as an excuse to cover up his own deficiencies?” But I found my thoughts were wrong. In no word or act did Master reveal even the slightest sense of doubt or incapacity to handle his own affairs, whether involving discussion or what he called his ‘work’. I found he had an enormous and total faith in Lalaji, and this gave him total confidence and an iron will in carrying out his own work. Even on this first day Babuji remarked more than once, “For success in work an unfailing will is necessary. If there is no faith 12

The First Exposure in the Master then the work cannot be done. Doubt is the enemy of spirituality. Doubt really shows lack of faith in the Master.”

Around nine o’clock Master called all of us, about six individuals, inside and gave us a group sitting. The sitting lasted for about thirty minutes. After this he went back to his hookah and later was busy with some correspondence in which he was assisted by Shri Ishwar Sahai. I was shy and nervous of going into the room and sitting with them, though all the others present, obviously members of the Mission for several years, went in. So I remained alone on the verandah till lunch. I ate my lunch at one o’clock and requested permission of Master to return to Bareilly. He permitted me to leave.

When leaving I suddenly felt a nameless sorrow gripping my heart, a feeling as if I was leaving my own home for a long journey, and something akin to leaving beloved ones behind, and tears sprang into my eyes, a phenomenon I have rarely experienced in my adult life. This lasted for almost half an hour before the sorrow disappeared. There were moments of almost overpowering sorrow before I got back to Bareilly.

I had come to see the Master and had had his darshan.

All the impressions I had in my mind were chaotic.

How to judge this man? How to understand him? How to evaluate his work? And the greatest mystery of it all was, what had he done to create in me that feeling of profound sorrow and distress that welled up in my heart when the moment of parting came? I had known this person for barely twenty-four hours. How, then, could such a strong emotion come into existence out of such a ridiculously short association—and one so superficial 13

My Master

and bereft of any sort of intimacy whatsoever? I had arrived as a total stranger and, to my mind, departed a stranger. Or had I? This was the question. True, I may need eons of time to ‘know’ Master. But did he similarly need a long time to know me and work upon me? No!

It could not be so, and the proof was in nothing else but the shattering emotional impact of this first meeting. I felt sure that he had done something in the innermost recesses of my heart; that a seed had been sown deep down as it were, and that this was the first reaction.

So, confused as I was in the superficial level of my existence, deep down a faith was born in me that day that I had found my Master, and that I was treading the right path to my goal. It is Master’s divine nature that no one who comes to him goes away disappointed, and I for one found an inner fulfilment from this first contact with what I came to label in my mind as ‘Divinity’.

“Master’s work,” I thought, “commences with the moment when the first human contact is established.”

Later experience indicated I was not entirely correct in this conclusion.

14

2





The Environment


Master’s house is a very old one, parts of it being over a hundred years old, while even the newer additions (excluding the recently built overseas visitors’

guest house) are more than a quarter of a century old. It is large and spacious, walled round completely, with a main gate on the western wall and a small door next to it. The gate is generally kept closed, visitors invariably using the small door to its left. Immediately on entering there is a large open courtyard, about a third of which is raised and paved with bricks. As one crosses the courtyard one comes up to the verandah of the main building. This is where Master and his abhyasis spend most of their waking hours. Master has his easy chair facing the gate, while the abhyasis sit facing him, with their backs to the gate.

On my first visit to Shahjahanpur I did not notice anything special about this house. But after two or three visits I discovered that as soon as I walked in through the entrance door, I felt as if I was in a different world altogether. The ‘atmosphere’ within Master’s compound is something unique. It has a spiritual quality which is so subtle that it defies description. On one or two occasions I have actually felt a jerk in my heart as I crossed the threshold to enter the compound. The transition from

My Master

the outside to the inside of the compound is as sudden and refreshing as a dip in a pool of cold water. The more sensitive the person, the more keenly this is felt.

On my first visit to Shahjahanpur I came as a visitor and did not notice any difference. On subsequent visits I found that I came more in the mood, and with the emotion, of one returning to his own home. This emotion became stronger and stronger with repeated visits, until it became so powerful that even as I left Delhi the emotional intensity would commence, and would become more and more deep until it naturally and harmoniously melted within just as I entered Master’s home. I have often been so shaken by this feeling that I have had to rest a little to regain emotional equanimity before going in to meet Master. Nowadays this emotional onslaught often begins even when I am just leaving Madras for Shahjahanpur. A restlessness begins to be felt in the heart, and this restlessness increases as the destination comes nearer and nearer, at times assuming the proportions of almost a physical heart-ache. I discussed this with Master.

Master laughed and said, “Yes, your observation is correct. Many persons have remarked on it. But I tell you it is all a matter of sensitivity. Develop sensitivity and see what Bliss you can experience. Really speaking, a person must create his own environment wherever he goes! That is the sign of spirituality. When you sit near a real saint of calibre you will feel peace and tranquillity.

Many people ask me how to recognise a saint. I tell them that if they experience peace when sitting near him, then there is saintliness in him.”

I asked Master why this intense restlessness should be there when we come to him. Master said, “It is a good 16

The Environment

sign. Restlessness is good. It indicates inner craving for the goal. Really speaking, in an advanced abhyasi the restlessness is always there, but submerged. Now when you think of coming to me the longing begins to develop, and the longing becomes restlessness until the desired goal is reached. So this restlessness comes into the experience. Now you see the environment here. It is unique. It is the experience of almost all abhyasis that there is something unique. It is Lalaji’s grace. In such an environment it is possible to grow spiritually in a very short time. You must create such an environment wherever you go. It is quite simple. Then you will find external thoughts do not disturb you; the outside environment does not disturb you. It is like a diver wearing a special suit. He carries his environment with him down into the depths of the ocean, and so the ocean has no fears for him.”

Later, after a few years of personal association with Master, I began to visit him at some of the places where he was camping. Here, too, I found an atmosphere of peace and tranquillity, but the atmosphere changed when he left. When I asked him why this happened, Master laughed and said, “Yes, the change is there as you have seen. But it is not my fault. I create the same atmosphere wherever I go, but what can I do if the people destroy it after I leave? To retain the same atmosphere we must control our thoughts. Thoughts create the atmosphere.

If you go to some of the holy places you will find peace there. Why? Because there people come in a spirit of worship and remain calm and prayerful, and so the atmosphere is moulded accordingly. Now if someone should build a cinema or a dance hall in the same place you will find the atmosphere changes immediately, 17

My Master

because people now come with other thoughts which modify the atmosphere. So in such places, I mean holy places, we must control our thoughts and guide them in the right direction. Temper and anger must be avoided.

Also passion. Because these things can destroy the atmosphere. But even if this happens, the thing can be changed again by meditation and right attitude.

“I am telling you another thing. It is a very valuable thing. You can ‘read’ the atmosphere of a place and see what sort of events have taken place there. It is very easy.

Just concentrate, and the reading will appear before your eyes. If you go beyond this you can even concentrate on the atmosphere in a general way and ‘read’ a country’s history in it. What happened, when, everything is there.

The records of everything are there, clear as anything, but it needs only one who can ‘see’ to read all this. You would have experienced that sometimes when you enter a new place you feel disturbances. It may be fear, it may be passion. This is automatic and becomes second nature to a sensitive person. Then by Master’s grace, if the power is given, you can ‘clean’ the place. Just imagine Master’s grace is flowing through the place and washing away all the impressions. That is all. You see how easy it is! But faith must be there, and a firm will.”

I asked Master how to develop sensitivity. Master said, “Develop awareness. Always try to be alert to what is happening, and sensitivity will develop. Many people meditate. But I am sorry to say many of them don’t know what is going on in the system during meditation. Why is this? Because they do not watch for what is going on.

One has to be alert to the transmission and its action on the system. Then the real joy of meditation begins. Now 18

The Environment

I tell you one thing. Whether a person has experiences or not, the transmission will work and complete the job.

But the real happiness comes when we know what we have got. So sensitivity is necessary.

“Another benefit is that as you become more sensitive progress becomes faster, because when you know what is being done you can co-operate with the Master actively.

So this is a great benefit. But I tell you one thing.

Sensitivity is also a curse in another way, because you become ‘open’ to everything. Everything affects you. I tell you it can cause much suffering and misery. Imagine looking anywhere or at anything or at any person, and immediately the whole thing is before your eyes.

How can you remain unaffected? Such a person will be compelled to share in the joys and miseries of all those around him.

“Sometimes I go to a new place where the atmosphere is so bad that I am almost suffocated. Then I have to clean it, otherwise I could not live in it. So we have to do this cleaning wherever we go. That is why I tell my associates that a Master is really a sweeper, doing a sweeper’s job. He attracts all the dirt and uncleanliness, and has to clean them off. That is why they say that for a whole country a single saint of calibre is sufficient.

He acts like a big cleaner, cleaning the whole country, because all the grossness is attracted to him. You see this tamasha (joke)? A Master is really a cleaner! That is why I say that a saint is a target for the world’s sorrows.

So sometimes we have to control sensitivity so that we are not too much affected. Otherwise a sensitive person will become a victim of his environment.”

I recall a visit Master once made to a city to visit abhyasis there. I had accompanied him. We were 19

My Master

accommodated in the residence of an abhyasi. All went well the whole day, but at night Master was extremely restless, and slept only in fits and starts. When I woke up next morning I found Master quite restless and exhausted.

The second night we moved to a nearby hotel, and I was happy that Master slept deeply and continuously right through that night. When he woke up, Master said, “Look here, we are in a hotel where thousands of people come and go, but the atmosphere is better and purer here than at that place. Is it not a shameful thing that the atmosphere in a house should be so gross and dirty while a hotel room is cleaner? What to say of the people who live there in that house? It is a shameful thing that people mould their lives in such a way that their environment is completely polluted and spoilt.

Really speaking our minimum duty is to leave the world at least as we found it when we came into it, not spoil it and destroy it. We should really try to leave the world a better place than we found it. Right living becomes very important. We must tune our lives in such a way that everything that comes in contact with us is improved.

Everything we touch must get divinised.”

I have visited Shahjahanpur very many times and stayed with Master. One thing I have noticed when I am with him is that for the duration of my stay all thought and worry about my home and family evaporate away even as I enter his residence. It is not something that I try to achieve, or pray for. I am not even conscious of it.

Yet the effect is that all thoughts of home, family and indeed the whole world outside the ashram seem to leave the mind, to find entry again only when I am finally out 20

The Environment

of the ashram. This total lack of care, or carefree attitude of mind, is a boon and blessing which one is not aware of when it lasts, but one only feels its absence when this mental state or state of consciousness departs.

On one grace-saturated occasion when I had the unique privilege of being with Master for three months continuously, I felt this all the more. A letter from home would suddenly make me conscious of the fact that I indeed had a home and a family somewhere. Momentarily I would be back in that other world, perhaps worrying a little about how things were out there, but as soon as I folded the letter and put it away, I would be back in the ‘here and now’ of Master’s Divine Presence, and the memory of all else, briefly awakened, would fade away, leaving me in peace, enjoying a tranquillity that is entirely out of this world. I have often pondered over this and felt that this is a spiritual condition that will bless us at death. We do not forget, for there is no effort on our part to forget. But a state of mind or consciousness comes into existence as a divine gift which transports us to a different level of existence where everything else ceases to be. In this condition one exists in a blissful state of nearness to the Divine, and this proximity has a healing quality about it, a gift of grace, which makes an unconditioned existence not only possible but a fact in our own being and consciousness.

On a lesser level I would like to record one more personal experience of the effect of Master’s environment on me. On one occasion I stayed about four weeks continuously at Shahjahanpur with Master. Several more abhyasi brothers and sisters were present, along with Master’s own household. One day I had to go to Bareilly for some urgent shopping. As I entered Bareilly 21

My Master

I saw a large advertisement put up, advertising a cinema currently showing in the city. The advertisement showed a well-known cinema actress in a suggestive pose, and the idea of sex came into my mind. It was at that moment that I became conscious of the fact that for the last four weeks there had been no consciousness of sex at all in my mind even though there had been men and women all around me! This was a rarely revealing occasion, displaying vividly the capacity of my Master in moulding the environment and the mind of the aspirant.

I have attended the Vasant Panchami celebration at Shahjahanpur as often as I could. This is the only formal celebration the Mission members celebrate annually. It is the birthday of Lalaji, and the celebration is spread over three days. I have found that the atmosphere in Shahjahanpur is something out of this world during those three days. It is quite different from the normal atmosphere. Master confirmed this.

He said, “You will not find this atmosphere when the Utsav is over. I tell you, during those three days it is as if a blanket or covering is put over this house.

And at the end of the celebration, Lalaji seems to catch one corner of the blanket and whisk it off. It is a divine atmosphere during those three days. It is Lalaji’s grace.

It is so pure and so highly spiritual, it is like living in another world.”

The only occasion when I have felt the atmosphere to be even more transcendentally pure and glorious was during the three-day celebrations at Madras in February 1973 when abhyasis from all over India, and from many centres abroad, congregated to celebrate Lalaji’s Birth 22

The Environment

Centenary. The celebrations were held in hired premises usually let out to celebrate marriages in. The hall is one of the largest and most beautiful available in Madras. I remarked on the special nature of the atmosphere during those three days.

Master confirmed my observation and laughingly added, “By Lalaji’s grace this place has been so fully charged that it will last for many years. All those who come here will benefit by merely being present here.”

Yet, when the celebrations concluded and I went to settle up accounts, the place looked so forlorn and empty that I felt like weeping. The life had gone out of the place, and what remained was a mere shell. That special atmosphere of absolute spiritual purity had evaporated.

We were once assembled in the house of Shri Umesh Saxena, Master’s son, at Besant Nagar in Madras. It was an informal gathering consisting of about half a dozen local abhyasis and two overseas abhyasis. We were all seated on the floor while Master sat on a sofa. The overseas abhyasis had been asking Master a series of questions on a variety of subjects. Somehow the subject veered round to that of the atmosphere and its influence—

what we call, in a rather restricted way, environmental influence. Master explained how the atmosphere can change depending on how people think and how they conduct their lives. Master said that all this information was stored in the form of richas which a competent saint could read when necessary.

Master went on to explain how such conditions could be re-created if and when necessary, how the conditions could be ‘drawn down’ as it were. The overseas abhyasis were eager to have a practical demonstration of this.

23

My Master

Master smilingly agreed. He said he would re-create the atmospheric condition that existed in very ancient times, when man was just emerging into life as a separate class of life. Master sat up straight. His expression became serious. His eyes seemed to concentrate on a point about six feet in front of him, at about the same height above the floor. He sat thus for about two minutes. Suddenly he moved forward and downward thrice, while making a peculiar noise like hmm...hmm...! He then sat still for a minute. Then the tension relaxed, and he smiled and asked us what we felt. I told him I felt the atmosphere to be very gross, heavy and oppressive, and I felt it to have been saturated with primitive terror. Master said this was the correct reading.

The overseas abhyasis were somewhat sorry that Master had only allowed this experience to last for barely a minute. Master laughed and said, “Do you think you could have borne it for a longer period? As Parthasarathi said it was charged with terror and very gross. If you were surrounded by it longer, then it would have affected you adversely. So I just gave you a taste of it. You see from what levels human life has evolved? But all this is not enough. When the divine atmosphere is created then you will really enjoy it. By Lalaji’s grace you will also experience that when you are ready for it!”

All yogic teachers have advised their students to set apart a room specially for their prayers and meditation.

The idea behind this of course is to have a room where the atmosphere is kept pure, uncontaminated by normal life routines. Master’s teaching expands this to the ultimate dimension of a pure and holy universe, where the whole universe becomes a prayer room. The older 24

The Environment

idea is restrictive. It seeks to enclose purity into a small place, implying that the rest of the home may be impure.

Master says this is not sufficient. We may begin at one point, our own hearts, but the seed of purity sown there must be nurtured and made to grow in such a manner that it radiates beyond the confines of the individual human system, radiates beyond his home and beyond his small world until, finally, the whole universe comes within its divine embrace.

25

3





Tolerance


Master is a living example of his own credo that a human being must fly, like a bird, on two wings, one of spirituality and the other of materiality. This is one of the most fundamental and far-reaching lessons of Sahaj Marg. This teaching simply means that a person must not neglect either his physical and material existence or his spiritual life. It is a revolutionary message that Master is broadcasting to the world, and has come when most needed. Indian yogic teachers have, by and large, tended to disparage the physical life as something nasty and unclean, from which an aspirant should run for dear life. The procedures of training prescribed are so complicated and rigid that it is well nigh impossible for an individual to subjugate and control his physical existence within his own span of life. When, therefore, is he to go on to spiritual progress? The only answer possible would seem to be, “In the next life or lives!”

Master teaches that there is nothing wrong with material creation and with a human’s material existence.

Once a spirit has become embodied, it is committed to living out the physical existence whether it likes it or not.

There is no option in this. It is not just the law, but it is a basic fact. This life is the only life we can really be sure of. It is here. We are living it. “But,” adds Master, “one

Tolerance

can regulate one’s life so as to normalise all the functions of the human system so that the person develops into a perfect human being.” The word ‘normalise’ is most important in this context. One does not aim, and is not expected to aim, at super-normal powers of the body which hatha yoga so lavishly promises. Nor is one to aim at the attainment of siddhis—such as the power to materialise objects, clairvoyance, levitation and the like—for these too are not normal to the human existence.

I repeat, we are not to ‘aim’ for these in sadhana.

Under the Sahaj Marg method of yogic sadhana Master offers precisely this training of how to normalise one’s life in all the details of its functions. Master has stated that most humans start life as animals, and to humanise them becomes the first step in sadhana. The animal man becomes a real human by the practice of meditation which regulates mental functions, and thereby makes it possible for the regulation to percolate down to the physical level. It is with the mind that we have to begin. Any process which starts with the body is then obviously putting the cart before the horse.

Meditation is the abhyasi’s part, the part he has to play in this divine adventure. The Master’s work is to clean the abhyasi of past samskaras and to transmit to him. I will not elaborate on this further as details are available in Master’s published works. One important aspect I would like to emphasise is that there is no control of functions, or elimination of any of them.

All that is done is to seek to normalise each and every function without atrophy of any of them.

Master bases his teaching on God’s wisdom. God created the universe. When he created a material 27

My Master

universe, He must have had good reason to do so. If the material life is leading us astray and away from our goal, then obviously it is our fault in not living the material life in the appropriate fashion. So all that we have to do to get back on to our path is to restore the proper

‘balance’ to our life whereby the two halves of existence are harmonised and in equilibrium. The humanised man can then proceed to evolve to the state of the perfect human being.

Master is, as I said earlier, the living example of this way of life. He is a householder who has married and shouldered the arduous responsibilities of family life.

He has experienced all the joys of love, and sorrows and miseries of separation that we suffer in our own narrower lives. It is surely a matter for wonder that he has so completely lived the life of the householder while simultaneously developing in himself the divine capacity to be a Master of spirituality too. His life is centred naturally around his own family. But whereas the centre and the circumference of our own lives have both merged into one single point which rests in the family, for Master the centre is the family while the circumference embraces the whole universe. This is the difference between his life and ours. And when Master, by his divine transmission, helps us to ‘expand’ into cosmic levels and super-cosmic levels of existence, he separates the shrunken circumference of our existence from its centre, setting the circumference free, or liberating it, so that it can expand wider and wider until it, in turn, is afforded the possibility of becoming universal. Thus, progressively, the individual self-centred human soul and consciousness develops and expands until it becomes 28

Tolerance

a universal person possessing a universal consciousness similar to the Master himself.

Master was born in a well-to-do, well-known and highly respected family. His father was certainly rich by local standards. The family background is one of high culture and deep respect for traditions, the former nurtured by his father and the latter by his mother. Master, in turn, has led his own life on the very keel of these solid foundations laid down by his parents. Master’s culture is so profound that it will not permit any undue or wanton criticism of other ways of life. To Master, everything has a place in the universal hierarchy. He teaches that other teachers are also doing God’s work, each one at his own level. Tolerance, as taught by Master, is not a virtue but a definite duty enjoined on the abhyasi. No system can ascribe to itself exclusively either total importance or total effectiveness. If a mountain has a summit, it is because it has a base to support it!

Some of our abhyasis have spent very many years practising yoga under other systems of training. When they finally came to my Master, they were inclined to weep over their ‘lost years,’ lamenting the fact that they did not come to Master’s feet earlier. Master’s invariable advice is, “Do not regret the time spent on the other method. It was necessary for your development. It has prepared you for this path. Be joyful that you have now found the path that can lead you onward.” Master teaches that while there are innumerable gurus, the real guru is none but God himself. It is the duty of each guru to lead his disciple to the next higher one when his own work with the disciple is finished. No guru should hold his disciples to himself possessively. A guru is for service to others and not for building up possessions, power and prestige for himself.

29

My Master

Tolerance must be extended to all facets of one’s life.

After many years of close personal association with my Master, I have come to the conclusion that tolerance is perhaps the most important spiritual quality as it seems to embrace, and emanate out of itself, the other virtues such as understanding, charity, and even love itself. I have often been told that love begets tolerance but, perhaps, the reverse—that tolerance begets love—is true. It is an accepted psychological axiom that only those who have hatred for themselves in their hearts project the hatred on the world. Such hatred is self-hatred, and comes out of an inability to accept one’s own qualities. In the widest understanding of the word, tolerance implies that everything has a place in the universal hierarchy, and it is the understanding of this basic truth of creation that tolerance reveals. Tolerance thus reveals the correct perspective in the universal scheme of things.

We have been taught that good and evil co-exist, that they are nothing but different facets of the same reality. So too have we been taught to regard vice and virtue and all the other opposites of existence. Where one exists, the other must exist. There is no choice.

Who, then, are we to revile at the negative (as we label them) manifestations? We are often haunted by the apparent antithesis in persons’ characters—a rich man being miserly; an honest man indulging in secret thievery; a virtuous person having a hidden, seamy side to his existence; a religious person with a dark and unsavoury personal life. All this perturbs us and, what is worse, frustrates us in our search for knowledge and understanding. Tolerance can give us that quantum of time which will permit us to probe below the surface and see the underlying truth. This is a minimum benefit 30

Tolerance

that tolerance confers—time to study and understand things. And inevitably, when the externals are ignored and we penetrate deeper, then understanding, true understanding, comes and we find that persons are other than what they appear to be. If we are earnest in our endeavour and zealous in our pursuit, a time will surely come when we can see the saint inside the sinner! This, to my Master, is a permanent vision. He sees nothing but the true Reality within.

We were once discussing the presence in our satsangh of a person known to be highly immoral. Some abhyasis were wondering how such a person had been admitted for meditation. After considerable debate it was decided to approach Master for clarification. His answer was simple and direct. He said, “I do not look into the lower aspects. My eyes do not go there.” He ignores all these things. Master sees what is best in a person, while we, at the ordinary human level, tend not only to see, but to look for, the worst. This is the difference.

To my personal knowledge Master has rarely criticised a person for anything. He also offers advice very very rarely. I asked Babuji once why he did not offer criticism when he saw something wrong.

Babuji answered, “Lalaji Saheb never offered advice in a direct manner. Yes, he would give hints; but how many are capable of understanding such hints? We should never offer advice unless asked. As a trainer it is the duty of the guide to bring about change by creating the proper conditions for it. That is the work of the trainer. This is the positive approach. If you criticise, then the abhyasi may begin to worry about it, and this will interfere with his progress.

31

My Master

“There is another thing I am telling you. Suppose I advise an abhyasi to do something and he does not do it. Then I am adding to his difficulties by putting upon him the sin of disobedience of the Master. So instead of helping him I have done him a disservice. Do you understand why I avoid direct advice? I do offer a lot of advice, but it is given out as general talk when all are with me. The intelligent person will take it up and apply it in his own life. Then progress is faster for that person because now he is co-operating with the Master.”

We see from this that Master’s attitude is not merely one of tolerance, but extends far beyond this to taking up responsibility for the abhyasi’s progress. As Master has emphasised again and again, this is the duty of a trainer in spirituality.

I remember an episode a few years ago when I was sitting with Dr. K.C. Varadachari and several other abhyasis at his residence in Tirupathi. We had been talking for some time. A person, obviously a new abhyasi, entered the room and prostrated before Dr. Varadachari.

He then sat close to him and started to talk to him. He was quite agitated. After some time he said, “Doctor, I am a miserable sinner.”

Dr. Varadachari became indignant. He asked in a voice of passionate emotion, “What sins have you committed? Some petty offence? A bottle of wine? A love affair? Come to me when you have done something original. Which fool has not committed these sins?”

Later he became very soft and affectionate, and went on to calm the troubled soul of the abhyasi with his wise words.

The point I am trying to make is, what is so original about sin, and what is so unique about our own sins that 32

Tolerance

we are ever preoccupied with them? Master teaches, very importantly and significantly, that there is no such thing as sin or virtue. All is samskara. Any action, whether it is good or bad, which forms impressions in the mind is creating a samskara and, in the spiritual sense, is undesirable. Sinning would appear to be certainly not as bad as the brooding over the sin, because brooding drives the impressions deeper and deeper into the mind, where samskaras of such hardness are formed that much subsequent effort is required to clean the system.

Master advises us to forget the past. The past should not worry us because it is the past, and we can do nothing to change it. What should concern us is the future which we can affect by our present action. It is in this direction that our endeavours must lie. The immediate past is of no more consequence than the more distant past.

“So,” Master says, “think all past actions to be those of a past life. This will make it easy to ignore them and to concentrate on laying the basis for future spiritual development.” This is an important teaching to us as abhyasis.

How does prejudice develop? How do we evaluate a person’s character? By what are we conditioned in our interpersonal relationships? The answer to all these questions is that a man’s antecedents are what guide us. If we can develop the ability to look on a person at this instant as a fresh, unknown entity, unconditioned by any past, then we will develop the capacity to see the real person, and not merely the external tortured human being that everybody sees. Then an objective ability develops, which penetrates beyond the external veils and sees the truth within. A person’s past may have been anything. What is he now? This is the most 33

My Master

important thing. But we, most of us, rarely ask this question because we are pre-eminently worried only about the past antecedents. Thus we miss the real person and see only a tangled and superficial web of trivialities enclosing the individual like a fly in a spider’s web.

That is why all new acquaintances are so glamorous, so welcome, while old friends are the ones with whom we quarrel and from whom we often part. Living in the present unites us, while living in the past can tend to separate person from person and, as history records for us, even nation from nation.

Prospective entrants to this system invariably ask one question. “What are the qualifications required to be a member of this system?” Master’s only answer to this question is, “Your willingness is the only qualification needed.” And invariably people wonder how this can be so. An element of ego is also present in this bewilderment.

After all, who wants to join an association of persons where such an apparently trivial qualification is all that is needed? Before we get into an organisation we like it to be as easy as possible. But if it is too easy doubt begins to emerge as to the worthiness of the organisation. Also, we like barriers to be just large enough to enable us to cross over into the chosen ground comfortably, but sufficiently large to keep out the rabble. But in a yogic system where the present is the only criterion, what other qualities can there possibly be which are important?

Willingness alone is in the present. All else, breeding, education, qualifications are over and done with. They have limitations and, in any case, do not last forever.

They serve merely to lay foundations.

Willingness denotes a very important mental state.

It indicates that a person has evaluated himself and sees 34

Tolerance

the need for change, and that he is prepared to act to bring about such change. So persons with this state of mind are ready to act and, more importantly, to be acted upon. They are the real raw material for Master’s work.

In thus defining the necessary qualifications, Master does no more than voice this inner truth.

He once told a visitor, “What you have been is of no importance. What is the use if your grandfather was a maharaja, but you are a beggar now? It would have been better if your grandfather had been a beggar and you a maharaja. So try to see what you can do to grow in yourself. For this you must begin now. And I am prepared to help you!”

Thus, at one stroke, Master destroys the edifice of social snobbery by saying class is unimportant, social eminence is unimportant and alas! even education is unnecessary. All that is essential for success is contained in the abhyasis’ willingness to accept guidance from the Master, and to pursue the path inexorably.

If we examine this concept of ‘willingness’ carefully we find that ultimately it points to the need for total surrender to the Master. As Master has repeatedly emphasised, surrender is necessary on the part of the abhyasi if Master’s work is to succeed. In one of Master’s writings he has given a pointer to this. What should be the ideal abhyasi’s attitude? In Master’s own words, “He must be like a dead man in the hands of the dresser.” That is, the abhyasi must be like a corpse, devoid of personal desire, personal opinions, and completely denuded of all resistance. Such an abhyasi is ideal material as he offers no resistance whatsoever, either physical or mental, to Master’s spiritual powers.

Master has used another illustration to emphasise this point. He has stated that a carpenter can easily 35

My Master

fashion whatever he desires from timber, but if he is given a chair as raw material to work with, what can he do? With timber he is free to do as he pleases, and to fashion what he has decided to create, whereas with a chair he is faced with severe limitations which cannot generally be overcome.

Once Master clarified this point with a third illustration. What do we do when we go to a doctor for treatment? We accept all that he says. We abide by his regimen of diet and medication. We follow his prescription on what we are to do and what we are to abstain from doing. If surgery is necessary we allow ourselves to be anaesthetised into a totally inactive condition so as to permit him to operate upon us. We have to do all this if the doctor is to succeed in helping us. Does this not imply a surrender to the doctor’s will and method? Can we question his method? Can we ask for a guarantee of success? Yet without all this we are prepared to surrender ourselves to the will of the doctor. Why, then, cannot we duplicate this attitude in our spiritual life? In spiritual life we ask for proofs first—proof of the existence of God, let us say; proof of the system’s efficacy, and so on. Master said this was not only wrong but illogical.

Master added, “Suppose I am willing to offer proof, how many can understand the proof? Look here, suppose you ask a scientist to prove certain abstract ideas, how many can understand the proof? And the higher the work the more difficult it is to understand the subject.

So we should try the system, and our own experience of the work will furnish the proof from within ourselves.”

There is another very vital point to be considered in Master’s offer of help and guidance. He merely asks 36

Tolerance

for willingness, forgetting all the past thoughts and deeds of the abhyasi. Why? Precisely because it is past.

The abhyasi can do nothing about his own past. We are literally the products of our past, but we are not the mute and impotent participants in our future which we assume ourselves to be. The past has brought us to the present. Beyond this it has no power to act. The future will be what we make of it now, in the present. So, by changing our way of life now the future can be changed.

Master therefore teaches us not to think of the past at all, but only to think, and more importantly, to act, in the present.

Extending the medical analogy, the doctor looks into the past merely to seek causes for present illness.

His action, remedial, healing and creative, is in the present. There is no use in a doctor blaming the patient for the past actions which have brought on the present illness. A doctor worth his name studies the patient and quietly goes on with his task of healing. This is what Master does in his spiritual work. Our past may be important to him, but to us it has no importance.

On the contrary our brooding about the past will only serve to strengthen our impressions and drive them in deeper and deeper, forming solid samskaras which are more difficult to clean. Herein lies the vital importance of surrendering up our past to Master, and forgetting it, but living the present as he guides us, so that our future can be what he wills it to be.

All that we consider desirable and covet are thus thrown on the dust heap, and we are asked to make a new beginning in which we come to Master as a soul entombed in a human body, seeking the highest goal open to mankind. Immediately and miraculously the 37

My Master

possibility is opened up of creating a brotherhood of man where all that is asked of us is that we be human beings.

As Master destroys the false edifices man has created around himself, of power, wealth, eminence, education, and so on, we too are required to destroy all this in our own mentalities. What he does, we in turn must do.

What is thrown to the winds must be thrown away once and for all. So this great tolerance for mankind as a whole, and for each of its units as a human being, is inculcated and practised. And in thus reducing all humankind to its grassroots, Master is most benevolent and god-like.

This is the greatest gift of his divine wisdom where, to the creator, all are one. Can a man differentiate between individual ants in an ant hill? To us all ants appear the same. Perhaps they have a government, a social structure, a class stratification, but to us all this is non-existent.

How much more must we humans all look alike to a Godly vision from above! When we emulate Master and learn to see all as one, then we too aspire to this godly conscience, to the development of such a divine consciousness in us, and the mere aspiration lifts us up and opens up the possibility of its actualisation.

So, coming back to tolerance, we see and understand how it is not merely one of the virtues, but is the cardinal virtue; and not merely this, it is the perception of the truth of creation that all men are created equal in God’s vision, and we do nothing but destroy the basic value of such creation when we seek to classify and divide what has been created as one. So tolerance is conforming to God’s intent and design, and such conformity enables us to swim in the same direction as the current, thus 38

Tolerance

making our journey not only trouble-free but doubly fast. In this lies the possibility of a speedy evolution to our goal within this life itself.

The ultimate benefit of this training is that a person is able to see himself as he really is, shorn of all attributes; and the ability to live with oneself develops as we grow to like what we see. After all, which of us really knows himself? But to know oneself one has perhaps to start by knowing and understanding others. Then this trained gaze must be turned from outwards inside. And as we see human beings swayed hither and thither by their attributes, we gain a deep insight and understanding of the mysteries of existence, followed by a tenderness and love which develop spontaneously from such a deeper understanding. Then there is no revulsion, no abhorrence, no vilification—because all is as it should be, so long as men and women continue to be as they are. Here begins to dawn the wisdom which says that all change must begin with oneself. As I change and grow, so does my vision, my consciousness. And with this growth a parallel possibility is given, that of helping others to strive for and achieve change and progress in themselves. So, all reform must begin, like charity, at home.

The traditional or familiar type of reformer who raves at a patient and long-suffering public, preaching hell-fire and damnation, is merely raving against himself, but using the public as a vicarious target. The true reformer is a silent worker who preaches against nothing, who reviles nothing, and who condemns no one but, having worked upon himself silently and in secret, sets out to do the same with and for others, in the same secret and silent manner. This is how my Master 39

My Master

works, silently, without publicity and propaganda. His work is backed by Nature’s infinite resources of power and wisdom which have been placed at his command without reserve.

40

4





Duty


Master’s interpretation of such concepts as charity, renunciation and duty is radically different from the usual ideas or meanings attached to them. We all think we know what they mean. Indeed our familiarity with these ideas is so thorough that we would be astonished if someone told us we do not know what these terms really mean. Most persons have the feeling that they have also been practising these ideas in accordance with the dictates of society and religion, occasionally of conscience too. And our own understanding so coincides with that of those around us that it is difficult to see how there could possibly be any other way of understanding these ideas. In any case we continue to do as we have always done, in the confidence that we have the religious tenets to back us up.

We are all familiar with the institution of religious charity, which I would call ‘ritual charity,’ practised by well-meaning men and women all over the world, whatever be their religious affiliation. The coin in the plate or special receptacle! Donations towards special causes thought up by pious persons; offerings in kind, all these are only too familiar to us. Then there is the coin dropped into the hands of a beggar outside the place of worship. Such charity is held to be a pious act,

My Master

capable of elevating the giver, and earning for him the blessings of the Almighty. Eastern religions are beset by this apparent virtue to a greater extent than their European counterparts.

What does the giver give away? Often it is nothing but a single copper coin of the lowest denomination, and that too generally to the accompaniment of admonitions and chastisement of the poor beggar for being a beggar. When this gift, supposedly prescribed by religion, has been bestowed, the donor’s face glows with a self-righteous glow at having fulfilled religion’s behest. Often this is the first of a series of expiatory and propitiatory acts when entering the place of worship.

Another aspect of such charity is to give away leftover food. It would be laudable if this was done while the food was still edible, but the charitable individual, in general, prefers to ensure that he is not depriving his family. So the leftovers are left over till nobody can eat them, and then, and then only, is the food given away to a poor beggar who is too starved to worry about the quality of what he eats. Again this charitable act is accompanied by much good and pious advice, and very often by abuse too.

Then there are the gifts given to abide by the advice of astrologers. Such gifts can often be very expensive depending on the degree to which certain planets are afflicted. In such cases the gift of jewels, silks, silver vessels, et cetera, are made to other members of the family circle and not to really needy persons. This is designed to spend money while keeping it within the family. There are also instances of what I call, for lack of a better term, the ‘final’ hypocrisy. This applies in the case of individuals embarking on the most pious and 42

Duty

righteous act of renouncing all wealth and possessions, preparatory to entering the holy state of sannyasa. In rare cases, certain individuals do give away their wealth to the needy, but more often such people apportion their wealth suitably among their kith and kin before donning the yellow robes. This, too, is charity! Many sannyasis go on earning ‘gifts’ and ‘donations’ which they send back to their erstwhile families. In such cases, not rare or uncommon by any means, the sannyasi often becomes a better provider than in his former incompetent role of householder.

I am not giving these examples to criticise existing ideas or to decry existing practices. After all, people can only behave as they are taught to behave. And when such teaching is the product of religious thought and precepts as interpreted by the caretakers of religion, the priests, there is very little people can do but obey blindly. The majority of mankind know no better than to superstitiously follow the instructions of the religious scriptures as interpreted by the priesthood. Superstition, and the fear it generates, are the compelling causes underlying such charitable acts. If people could be made to see the light of truth and shed superstition, much of this religious hypocrisy would automatically vanish.

In India, religion has a firm and tenacious hold on an individual’s life, and almost all aspects of life from birth to the final disposal of the dead are governed by rules of ritual and procedure. The interests of the priests, who officiate at each and every one of these ceremonies, whether for the living or for the dead, are zealously guarded by prescribing fees at each stage of the ritual, euphemistically called ‘offerings.’ In such a society the people have no choice but to suffer in silence 43

My Master

and part, outwardly cheerfully, with a portion of their hard-earned income. The more hardy and experienced individuals bargain with the priesthood to limit their loss while making the ritual as all-embracing as possible, while the meek suffer the most. The only compensation these poor sufferers have is that of putting on a virtuous face—which they do to the best of their ability!

After saying all this I must, in fairness to all religions, add that religions themselves are not responsible for this state of affairs. All this is nothing but the rapacious hold that a greedy priesthood has on a very gullible and illiterate public as we have in India.

What does my Master teach about these matters?

Firstly, no person has a right to indulge in charity until his family needs are fully satisfied. No person has a right to give away money or gifts until he has made absolutely sure that such gifts are coming out of available surplus in the family’s means of existence. Otherwise it is merely a case of robbing Peter to pay Paul. On superficial examination this looks to be a very very selfish approach.

I had a long discussion with Master on this once.

Master said, “Look! suppose you want to give away a sum of money as charity, and your family will suffer because of it, can you call this charity? I would only call it foolishness. What is your duty as a grihastha (householder)? When you married and accepted the responsibilities of a family existence, you accepted to fulfil certain duties by the family. These duties are totally obligatory. Therefore, if your gift is going to make the family suffer, then it is not a gift at all, it is not charity.

You are really robbing your own family. Look here! How can this robbery be called charity.”

44

Duty

I then asked Master whether such an act of charity would be justified if the other members of the family agreed to it. Master answered, “No! It cannot make it right. Which Hindu wife will go against her husband’s wishes? And in the case of religious performances or ceremonies they will not oppose it. It is for you to decide what is your duty, and then it is your duty to follow that correctly. If you consult others you are only trying to shift the blame and responsibility on others.”

I asked a third question. What about the negligible gifts made to beggars, et cetera? Master laughed an ironical laugh. “Do you call it charity?” he asked. “To feed the poor and to give some rags to your brother human beings is not charity. It is your duty. It is our duty as human beings to look after our suffering brothers and sisters. It is a shame that this is thought to be charity.”

This dialogue made it amply clear that unless a person can really afford a gift, he has no right to make one in any form. Master’s interpretation is from the standpoint of duty.

It is an anomalous fact that poor people often seem to be able to afford more for charity than rich people. The sacrifices that poor people have made not only during normal times but during times of national disaster, natural calamities and so on is something to be wondered at. Master’s interpretation which differentiates need from want explains this curious anomaly. Master, in my experience, has never used the word ‘want’ but always sticks to the use of the word ‘needs’. This emphasises the fact that there is a basic difference between the two terms. Needs are basic to existence, whereas wants are those which are created by desires, and superfluous in one 45

My Master

way or the other to existence. This is why poor people are able to afford charity because their needs are very few, since their lives are simple and in tune with nature.

Therefore, however small their income, and however low their level of existence, it seems to be possible for them always to scrape up some quantum of surplus from their own existence which they can offer wholeheartedly to alleviate the miseries of their brother human beings.

In the case of the rich, who are burdened with what is sophisticatedly called higher standards of living, the wants are enormous in terms of luxury, in terms of unnecessary paraphernalia so that whatever be their level of income they seem always to need more and more money to meet the expenses created by yet new desires, and this goes on ad infinitum. When this has gone on sufficiently, some of the rich often start feeling guilty, and then it is not uncommon to find a few of them giving large amounts to charity. But their mind is so befogged that often the money is wasted on conscience-placating ventures like building temples, rather than in helping the poorer section of humanity to live a better life.

Such persons often waste their enormous wealth in doing what they consider to be charitable acts. It is common for them to turn away a beggar from their door while, under priestly instructions, being willing to spend minor fortunes on a single occasion in placating their family deities. It is rare to find an inner change in such individuals which will lead them to the right path. Their fear of retribution for the evils committed becomes merely a superstitious force driving them from pillar to post in a religious way of ritual propitiation.

There is no change of heart but merely a fear-motivated unburdening of ill-gotten wealth, similar to the frantic 46

Duty

bailing out of water from a sinking boat. If the rich would simplify their lives in accordance with Master’s basic teachings, the surplus that would be released would be simply enormous.

We find the same law working even at international levels where certain nations are saturated with economic abundance but are yet unwilling, and often unable, to divert their surplus to the more needy nations. This calls for universal understanding by all human beings as to how to guide their individual lives in such a way that the gifts of nature’s bounty are made available to all rather than to a mere few.

I remember a discussion in a Western capital which centred on the issue of lowering birth rates in underdeveloped countries. Some well-meaning friends were trying to prove that if only countries like India would drastically reduce their populations, then the land would flow with milk and honey. The argument came to a rather abrupt end when an Indian gentleman present pointed out that a UN Commission report had given statistics to show that the amount spent on bringing up a Western baby in the first year would suffice to feed and bring up five hundred babies in an underdeveloped nation. This points to the gross over-consumption by Western nations, and the need for such people to curb consumption if the people of the world, as a whole, are to benefit from available world resources. A significant fact worth noticing is that poverty creates charity whereas affluence breeds selfishness.

Master strictly enforces this with his abhyasis too. I have seen him time and again refusing to accept donations offered by his abhyasis. He invariably asks the abhyasi, 47

My Master

“Where are you working? What do you earn? Are you married? How many dependents have you?” And after all this, if the answers satisfy him, he may accept the donation. In certain cases he has refused donations even after all this clarification. I asked him why he refused certain donations. He said, “Some people sincerely want to help the Mission. If they can really afford it then I accept what they give. There are others who offer me a donation only to impress me with their generosity (laughing). The donation does not come from the heart but only from the purse. In such cases I refuse it.”

To Master a donation by itself means nothing. He cares nothing for the money. But it is an indication of the abhyasi’s love for Master and the Mission. Master therefore accepts donations only as tokens of the love of the donor. I have known Master refusing really large donations on two occasions. The amounts offered were so very large that a lesser person than Master would have instantly accepted them.

On the other hand I have known Master to be deeply moved when an abhyasi, with tears in her eyes, offered very humbly, shyly and with great hesitation, an incredibly small amount as a donation. Master was overjoyed with the offering and instantly accepted it, and kept on talking about it to everyone for months. I asked him why he made such a fuss over such a small amount.

Master said, “If Birla were to give me a crore of rupees it would be as nothing to Birla, because it is a small fraction of his wealth. But what this abhyasi has given, though such a tiny amount, has been laboriously saved over many months, and represents the entire savings of the abhyasi. You see the degree of sacrifice, and the love behind it? Therefore I value it greatly.”

48

Duty

Once at Shahjahanpur an old man, aged more than seventy, came to see Master. He was quite active, well-dressed and with an enormous turban wound round his head. Master agreed to meet him and give him some time. Master set the conversational ball rolling by asking him where he was from, and what he did. The person answered that he was from a nearby town and that he was a social worker. Master said, “Is that so! I am very happy to hear that you are a social worker. It is what our country needs. What do you actually do?” The aged person was gratified to have this reaction, and said that he organised meetings in villages where he distributed clothes to the needy, and also did mass poor-feeding.

Master said, “Oh! You call this social service? This is not correct. As a human being it is your duty to your brothers and sisters to clothe the naked and feed the hungry. It is unfortunate that you should call this social service. The real social service is not this. When you can do something to raise up your brothers and sisters to the true goal of realisation, then that can be called social service.”

After this person left, Master remarked to me, “See how our values have degenerated. Our country has always been known for its spiritual values and for the great hospitality of our people. But now this is what we have become. But still I am telling you, nowhere in the world will you find such hospitality as you find in India, even today. By Lalaji’s grace, India will rise again to be the spiritual leader of mankind.”

In Master’s own household one can see his principles being applied exactly. It is an instruction in itself to observe how Master is the living example of his own 49

My Master

teaching. The accommodation provided for visitors is of the simplest, while being comfortable. Luxury is not provided. Similarly, the food offered to visitors is wholesome and nourishing but of the simplest variety.

There is no ostentation, no impressive variety, and no pandering to taste. I have found that this is akin to Nature’s way of service. Such food helps us to get what we need from it, nourishment, and prevents greediness and over-indulgence. Taste, artificially created taste, only creates greed and leads to unnatural living. Simple food helps us to live as Nature intended us to live, eating what the body needs for its healthy existence and no more. This is a very valuable lesson which Master teaches us by direct example.

Once at lunch at Shahjahanpur, one of the abhyasis was very critical of the quality of the food, and particularly the monotonous repetition of the same preparations day after day. He was quite vocal in his criticism. He said he wished there would be some variety in the menu, and wondered why something could not be done to make the food more tasty and appetising. After completing lunch we all came out of the room and went to the verandah where Master was sitting in his usual easy chair. Master could not possibly have heard the abhyasi’s remarks.

Yet, as soon as we came near him, Master got up from his chair, walked a few steps to meet us, and told the disgruntled abhyasi, “Look here! I give simple food for the body but I give Divine food for the Soul!” He then went back to his chair and his hookah.

A few minutes later I chanced to be alone with him, and Master said, “Look what people expect of me. I have told them that I can take complete responsibility for their soul, but the body they must look after themselves.

50

Duty

I try to give good food. We must eat enough to keep the body fit to take us through life. Food is not for taste, it is only for nourishment. I think I give good food, enough for this purpose. I am here to serve people for their spiritual needs, but if they think I am here to provide tasty feasts for them too, then what can I do.”

Many families have been ruined by putting up a false front on borrowed money. Ego is the cause of such behaviour. We live and entertain beyond our means merely to impress others in our circle. But good opinion, so bought, is very very expensive, and one has to pay for it bitterly in the end. True seekers of Reality cannot indulge in such hypocritical behaviour. We must take Master as our living example and conduct our lives as he does his.

Ever since the Mission was founded in 1945 there has been a steady influx of visitors into Shahjahanpur.

In the beginning it was but a trickle. Now, with the growth and expansion of the Mission, the trickle has become a flood. And yet, all these years Master has been entertaining his guests out of his own personal resources.

His resources have always been very slender. How he has been able to feed the thousands of visitors who go to see him each year, and often clothe quite a few of them too, is a matter for wonder. Those who know him know that while in service he occupied a humble position in life, one which could hardly have offered any scope for savings of any magnitude. But by studying his way of living it is clear that if we can simplify our lives, and eschew all ostentation, all unnecessary paraphernalia and luxury, then even a small income can be made to stretch a very long way.

51

My Master

Master’s call to modern humanity is, “Be simple and in tune with Nature.” He lives the life that he asks others to live. Master considers all artificial ways of living as unnecessary, harmful and often hypocritical. Our hospitality must be geared to our means. Hospitality, flamboyant hospitality on borrowed money, can only be hypocritical as it seeks to impress others, and is untrue and unreal and opposed to Reality. This is a moral lesson which we need to learn and to disseminate.

I have had long discussions with Master on one condition most religions seem to prescribe: to give away all wealth and property before embarking on a religious way of life. Some even prescribe total renunciation of the family, and adoption of asceticism. Master is quite definite that such prescriptions are unnecessary, and some may even go against Nature.

He said, “What is wrong with wealth as long as it is rightly earned? When a man works he is entitled to the fruit of his labour. Yes! There is a right way of using wealth, as there are innumerable wrong ways. Wealth is only a power. And all power is good so long as it is used constructively for the good of humanity. Every person has a right to earn money lawfully. I see nothing wrong in it. But we must not be attached to wealth. It must not become the aim. Our Goal must always be fixed, and there must be no straying from it. Anything may come on the way, but we must go on and on towards our goal.

You must treat wealth like a river. Take as much of it as you need, and then use the rest for the benefit of your brothers and sisters. That is the right way.

“Now look here! They say you must leave your family and children and run away to the jungle, or to the Himalayas. What is the use? It is not easy to do 52

Duty

it. It is against Nature. It is also a cowardly act as you are running away from your duties and responsibilities.

When you are in the jungle your thoughts will be only of the home and family. How can you do tapasya under such conditions? Then what is the correct way? I am telling you it is better to bring the jungle into your home, rather than carry your home into the jungle.

“How is this to be done? Really speaking, it is quite simple. Think that in your own home you are only a guest. You will find all problems evaporate. Treat your wife and children as trust property entrusted to you by God. They are not yours. They are not your wife and not your children, but they are under your trust, under your care. You understand this? All sense of possession must go. It is only when you think ‘this thing is mine’ that loss also comes. When it is in trust you can administer it objectively and very correctly. You will be able to do for them what they need, what is necessary.

“Really speaking, you learn correct performance of duty only in the family environment. Lalaji used to say that the grihastha life is the most important training ground, for it is here that we learn true charity, true love, true renunciation. Only in the life of the householder do we learn to think of others before we think of ourselves.

So it is very important. And I tell you it is really very easy. Just divert the mind!”

Master continued, “Really speaking, I have not much opinion about sannyasa. Yes, there are a few genuine sannyasis who have adopted that way of life out of a true and genuine spirit of renunciation and longing for the Divine. But the majority are only those who have run away from the responsibilities of life and are living off society. Some of them are quite bad too in their ways 53

My Master

of life and moral behaviour. But our people have been taught to revere them, and many suffer for it.”

According to Master the ancient traditional ways of renunciation of wealth and family can be exceedingly harmful, spiritually, and can block an abhyasi’s spiritual progress, sometimes through several lives. I was told the spiritual case history of an abhyasi under Master who had been practising Sahaj Marg meditation for nearly fifteen years. However the person had stagnated at one point, and all progress had stopped there. Master had made several attempts to initiate further progress but had not been successful.

At this stage Master decided to examine the abhyasi’s past life and see whether there was some cause there preventing progress in the present life. Master examined the past life during a special meditation sitting. He found that in the previous life this abhyasi had been a woman, married and with several children. She was a lady of deep devotion and sincerely desired to pursue the ancient goal of obtaining mukti, a limited form of liberation under which there is no physical rebirth. She had felt irked at having to lead the life of a housewife.

Being desirous of adopting sannyasa, she one day stole away from her home with her children, took them into the jungle, and abandoned them on the bank of a river there. Then she ran away. The frightened children set up a wailing which followed her as she ran away. Unable to hear their lament, she closed her ears with the palms of her hands and ran on and on. Master found that the wailing of the abandoned children had created a very strong and profound impression on the mind, leading to the formation of deep samskaras. This had prevented spiritual progress of the abhyasi in the present life.

54

Duty

Master said, “Look here! She thought she had done a virtuous thing which would earn her mukti, but really it was a cruel and heartless act. So Nature punished her in this life by denying spiritual progress, the very thing for which she renounced her family life!”

Then he added, “Since the abhyasi is very sincere and has real craving for progress, I cut that impression.

Do you know what happened? The person immediately moved up three points! I call this spirituality. It is Lalaji’s grace that this is possible. Where can one find a Master like Him! But for Lalaji’s grace I do not know how many more lives that poor woman would have had to take before she could move forward. We must not go against Nature. See how much evil has been spread by people who know nothing. I tell you, unless these wrong ways of approach are given up spirituality is impossible.”

This case history has profound implications for us.

Asceticism is not the right way. It is as wrong, and as anti-nature, as a totally materialistic way of life is.

They are but two extremes of the scale, and neither can succeed. Then what is the correct way? Master says that the balanced existence, one in which all aspects of human existence are balanced, is the only correct way of life. In such a life material values and spiritual values go side by side, and one should not be neglected for the other. We must devote equal attention to both sides of existence. The two sides of existence are like the two wings of a bird. No bird can fly on one wing. It needs both. Similarly, we have to live both the material and spiritual existences in a balanced way, using them as instruments to take us to our Goal. They should not become ends in themselves. Some persons make the 55

My Master

mistake of taking the spiritual life or pursuit to be an end in itself. It is only a means to an end.

Our goal must be a fixed and definite one, that of achieving the perfect human condition. In this there must be no wavering, no faltering. The material life, the life of and in the body, offers the possibility of seeking and attaining this goal. So, to that extent, our life in the body is essential. It is in this life, in this existence that we can and must seek our goal. The spiritual life too, is merely the way to be trodden, and not to be mistaken for the goal.

It is in this confusion of the way for the Goal that much human misery lies. It is also the failure of religion, because a religious or pious life, by itself, is incapable of leading us to the goal. When people mistake the way for the goal then life becomes meaningless, and ritualistic and mechanical. Then stagnation sets in, in the individual, in society, and in a whole nation.

Master repeatedly emphasises this crucial aspect of his system, that the two sides of life, the material and the spiritual, are both necessary to help us reach our spiritual destination, and the degree to which they can be normalised and balanced will determine the degree of our success.

I have referred certain personal problems to Master, seeking his guidance to achieve perfect balance. Master’s reply was terse but illuminating. “Perfect balance cannot be achieved in the human existence. If perfect balance is achieved then this life will end immediately. We must aim for proper functioning of all our faculties. This is itself a great thing. Such proper functioning of all our faculties I call saintliness. Perfect balance can exist only in Him!”

56

Duty

In India we have been hearing a great deal about non-violence all of our lives. Non-violence, or ahimsa as it is termed in Sanskrit, would appear to be one of the vital aspects of Hindu dharma. One of the important statements relating to this says ahimsa paramodharmaha: non-violence is the highest duty. In one of the religions this practice of non-violence is carried to the extent of walking barefoot so as not to crush any insect life under the feet, and pads are used to cover the mouth and nostrils so that life-forms carried in air should not be breathed in and destroyed inside our system. The enormous number of useless cattle to be found all over India also endorses the widespread practice of this system.

But there are curious reservations in this practice. The ahimsa practised is not a universal ahimsa. That is, it does not embrace within its scope all life, but only those selected for protection by the religion concerned.

To Hindus the cow is sacred, so the cow should not be slaughtered. Sometimes the question of cow slaughter assumes such exaggerated importance and publicity that it gets blown up into a national debate, with political and religious leaders joining in the fray. But the same protagonists of ahimsa are prepared to destroy, with violent gusto, other life forms for which they have no regard. There is a deep antithesis between precept and practice. And unfortunately the ahimsa principle seems to find no place in interpersonal relations at the human level. Tragic and ignominious examples of this crass and inhuman disregard for life can be found in the wanton and wilful destruction of hundreds of thousands of innocent human lives during inter-religious or inter-communal feuds.

57

My Master

I have had occasion to discuss this question of ahimsa with Master, and his explanation, as always, is very simple and easy to accept. Wanton destruction is himsa or violence. I asked for clarification.

Master laughed and said, “Suppose you are going out at night and you have some money in one pocket, and some more in another. A thief holds you up with a gun or knife and asks you to give up your money. You take out money from one pocket and give it to him. He, being afraid of coming too near you, asks you if you have any more. Will you say yes and give him the money from your other pocket? Certainly that would be very foolish.

Why? Because your duty is to protect your possessions, and anything you do to protect them is right.

“Suppose somebody comes violently into your house, some rowdy, and tries to molest the women of the house.

Will you keep quiet and practise ahimsa? That is only cowardice. Your duty is to protect those for whom you are responsible, and if you have to beat him and throw him out, it must be done. I would say this must be looked at from the point of view of duty alone. Doing your duty is right conduct, dharma.

“I am telling you one thing. This idea of ahimsa is a good idea, but if it is applied wrongly it can make people weak and impotent. How can soldiers practise non-violence? It is their duty to kill the enemy. In the Gita Shri Krishna tells Arjuna the same thing. He tells him to go and destroy the enemy, otherwise it is cowardice. Take the case of a doctor. When he cures a sick man he does it by destroying the germs in the body.

Strictly speaking this is violence too, but would anyone be prepared to die to save germs? (Laughing.) We have 58

Duty

to see what the destruction is for, whether it is necessary for correct performance of duty; for creation.

“Restoration of health is a creative act. There can be no creation without destruction. So destruction is not wrong or bad in itself. The motive behind it is what is to be examined. In the mind there must be no destructive thought or emotion. That is bad. A soldier kills impersonally. He does not know whom he is killing. He has no hatred in his heart for the individual he kills. His actions are not motivated by personal greed or hatred.

He is merely doing his duty. Similarly, a doctor has no hatred in his heart for the germs which he destroys. But to preserve life he has to do it. Suppose a snake comes to bite your child, will you keep quiet? Such ahimsa is mere foolishness.

“In spirituality obedience is the highest virtue.

When a person surrenders to a Master, it means he has surrendered completely in all ways. He has become merely an instrument in the Master’s hands. How can such a person even try to decide what is right or wrong?

Here obedience alone is correct. There are various levels of existence, and duty is different from level to level.

The soldier obeys the captain’s orders; but in ordering his troops the captain, in turn, is only obeying the orders of his immediate superior officer—and this goes on up the scale of authority.

“In spiritual work there is no question of personal preferences or of personal opinions. The Master guides us in all ways. And if Nature wants destruction, it has to be carried out. We are merely instruments. If one instrument turns out to be blunt and useless, the craftsman will throw it away and take up a better one.

You understand this idea? So obedience is the highest 59

My Master

virtue. After all Master, who works for Nature and carries out the orders from above, knows what is to be done.” On this note the discussion ended.

At a subsequent discussion session both the topics of obedience and destruction were again raised by me.

I asked Master why sincere people should be blamed for obeying the religious teachers. After all, they were only doing what Master himself was saying was most important. They were obeying their preceptors. Master agreed that there was some justification in thinking like this. He however added something which made this subject very clear.

He said, “Obedience is good. I agree they obey, maybe only partly, yet the spirit of obedience is there.

But I tell you, suppose they obey a dacoit, is it correct?

No, it cannot be. A dacoit destroys life only to loot the wealth of the people. There is no other motive behind it.

Similarly, people may obey others who tell them to do something or other. Behind all this obedience there is only the selfish greed for personal gain. Why do people make large offerings to priests or astrologers? It is only for personal gain. So this is one thing, one aspect.

“Secondly, there may be sincere people who obey without any selfish desires. In their case what is the fault? You will find some highly sincere and loyal chelas with even robbers and dacoits. They almost worship them. Why is this? It is because they have not come to any judgement regarding the person they have become attached to.

“I have written in Reality at Dawn about the importance of seeking the right guru. If you obey the right guru it is good and will lead you to your goal. But if you have the wrong person to guide you then obedience 60

Duty

will not help you at all. So you see the importance of having the right guru? In my opinion this is the most important thing, to find the real Master. Then when you find him you should never let him go! If you don’t find such a Master then it is better to pray to God to send you a real Master. He will surely come. But there must be no compromise in this matter. I tell you it is better to have no guru at all than to have the wrong guru.

Without a real Master we may not move forwards, but it is better than going backwards with the wrong guru.

So I tell my associates we must be very careful in this matter. It is very vital.

“People ask me how they can judge a Master. It is easy. Your heart will give you the answer. I have told you that when you sit near a real saint you must feel peace.

This is one sign. If you find a person whom you think can guide you, then follow his teaching for some time sincerely. Continue if you find progress. If not, look for another guide. People have been taught that we cannot change our guide. But this is not correct. We take a guide for our benefit, not his. And we have every right to change the guide until we find the real Master. Then our job is over. Once you have handed yourself over to such a person, your work is over.”

I then reverted to the subject of destruction which had been worrying me somewhat. I asked Master how destruction could ever be justified.

Master answered, “Yes, you have some doubt. But it is there only because you are thinking in a narrow way.

Think of destruction as change. What happens when you cut down a tree? The tree is destroyed. But the carpenter makes furniture out of it. So the wood is used.

The wood is still there, the form has changed. When a 61

My Master

person dies we think it is the end. Death is final, that is our view. But it is not correct. What we see as death is only the rebirth into another life. Similarly, what we see as birth, when a baby is born, must be death in another life giving birth here. You understand this? It is only a change of form. The life goes on and on, but the form keeps changing until a fortunate person finds a Master who can grant him his liberation. This comes out of higher understanding. There can be no progress without change. Without change there is only stagnation. This is an important point I am telling you. Without change no progress is possible.”

Master then added something very important for the clarification of our abhyasis. He said, “Even in our abhyas we must remember this. The condition, that is the spiritual condition, must keep changing if there is progress. Often we find that an abhyasi has a good experience at a particular level, which he likes to be repeated at subsequent sittings. But I always tell them that if they have the same experience again and again, then they should run to the preceptor, because such repetition of experience shows stagnation, and requires correction. So change is necessary because without it no progress is possible.”

62

5





Love


All religions preach Love. It has formed the major theme of the world’s output of great poetry. At the individual level everyone seeks it in his or her own life.

Love has been responsible for heroic deeds, for acts of great courage and valour, and for much of the world’s artistic output. It is probably quite true to say that behind every act of human endeavour lies this search for love. And its glorious working of unsurpassed beauty is in the manifestation of faith—faith at all levels culminating in the spiritual life where love finds its supreme flowering and glory in the search for the unknown Ultimate.

My Master too frequently refers to the need for love in one’s life. One of his most revealing ideas is that love is a godly or divine thing, and therefore not to be spurned. Love is to be diverted to its proper and natural object, God! What the human individual is required to do is to divert his mind so that the love in the heart can be diverted to its real goal.

My Master’s personal life is the expression of his inner love for all mankind. His is a pure and divine love, universal in its scope and yet individual in its manifestation. Anyone who has closely observed Master would have found, as I have, that he is the most loving,

My Master

charitable and hospitable person one can find. He is all this, but in a manner so quiet, so subdued and so utterly natural that the significance of his actions are generally lost in their simplicity. Few onlookers penetrate his external simplicity to perceive the inner significance of his words and acts. In fact, Master’s simplicity is highly deceptive—and the only thing about him that deceives people.

Once when Master was talking to one of our overseas preceptors he said, “Look here, I never deceive anybody, but what can I do if they deceive themselves? My simplicity is the thing that deceives most people. Few persons are able to go beyond it. My simplicity is so much that all my life people have thought me to be a simpleton.” Master laughed when he said this, and continued, “Now look here, many people come to see me but who really sees me? Most persons only look to the external appearance. It is a pity that few are able to go beyond and penetrate to see the inner Reality. So many people come to see me but few really see me. They go back as they came. So you see my simplicity is really a deception, and today I am revealing it to you!”

Master’s impersonal love for his devotees is not shown in grand deeds, but the love is hidden behind every small, insignificant and often unnoticed act in the humble routine of day-to-day existence.

On one of my visits to Shahjahanpur about twenty of us were gathered around him in the open courtyard, Master in a deep canvas deck-chair, the others clustered around him, some on chairs, the others on charpoys or rope-cots. It was after dinner of a late summer evening, not cold but extremely balmy and pleasant. From nine o’clock the number of persons around Master steadily 64

Love

declined as abhyasis went off to bed, one by one. All slept out in the open on the charpoys.

By 11:00 pm there were only three of us with Master, the others by now soundly asleep all around us. Master was answering our questions and revealing many profound things to us, when suddenly and abruptly he arose, went into his room and came back with a blanket in his hands. He walked to the charpoy of an abhyasi sleeping farthest from us, draped the blanket over him, tucked it in under his feet, and then quietly came back to his seat to resume the interrupted conversation. I surmised that the abhyasi must have been feeling cold (he was, I discovered next morning, one of my young colleagues from South India) and somehow Master had divined this, and lovingly covered him with a blanket.

Otherwise why should that particular person, and he only, have been singled out for this special attention?

No one was more surprised than the abhyasi himself when he woke up next morning to find himself with a blanket over him.

On the three days during which Vasant Panchami is celebrated there is generally a large gathering, with people sleeping around in all the rooms and covered areas. The surplus is accommodated in other buildings nearby. The days are full of activity, and they are long days too as we get up at 4:00 am, and go to bed around midnight. Irrespective of where the abhyasis stay, meals are arranged at Master’s residence. Because of the large number present they are fed in batches, and the total service lasts several hours.

One evening, on the first occasion when I attended the Vasant Panchami celebrations, I was feeling a bit 65

My Master

tired and out of sorts. The first batch for dinner was nearly through but there were so many waiting that I decided to go without dinner, and went to bed. At about 10:30 pm I suddenly found Master coming into my room where I had so far been alone. He called me by name and said, “You have not eaten yet. Please come with me. I have prepared a special place for you inside where you can eat. Food has been placed ready for you.”

I did not know what to say but quietly accompanied him inside. He sat with me while I ate. The significant thing is he did not ask me whether I had eaten or not.

He told me that I had not eaten yet and took me inside.

People were too busy to have noticed me, but yet Master, with all his preoccupations, had not been too busy to divine that one under his roof had not had his dinner!

It was a matter of wonder to me how he had singled me out as perhaps the only person who had not had his dinner.

Such episodes, which I have wonderingly seen repeated again and again, have confirmed me in my opinion that Master feels within himself everything that all those around him feel—and responds whenever response is necessary. The response may be a physical act as in the episodes related above, or may be a transmission of his own spiritual essence. Master’s empathy with others is complete and natural, so natural in fact that he may be said to be a mirror which reflects what is in its presence.

The Vasant Panchami celebrations are held in winter, and winter in Shahjahanpur can be, and generally is, very cold. It is cold enough not only to astonish European visitors but, on occasion, to cause them considerable discomfort too. South Indians unfamiliar with the North 66

Love

generally do not appreciate the severity of the cold, and it is therefore quite normal for one who is on his first winter visit to come totally unprepared to face the climate. Master keeps a small reserve stock of blankets for such visitors. Some of our sisters also knit woolen pullovers all the year round to keep a small reserve supply available at Mission headquarters in Shahjahanpur. Yet the demand often exceeds the supply.

On one occasion Master was seated in his usual corner in the sunny part of the courtyard, his usual winter station. We were a small group around him, on this the day prior to Vasant Panchami day itself. It was about eleven o’clock in the morning, but even out in the sun it was quite cold as the winter that year was rather severe. Master was dressed in his usual fashion in a dhoti and kurta, acknowledging the fact that it was winter by adding a sleeveless woolen pullover, quite inadequate for that cold, to his attire. He had a blanket covering his knees. His main weapon against the cold seemed to be his hookah, which he was smoking with great relish and visible satisfaction.

At this time a South Indian abhyasi walked into the compound, carrying his sole piece of baggage, a hold-all.

He was wearing just cotton trousers and a terylene shirt, and was shivering in the cold. He came up to Master and greeted him in the traditional fashion and sat down with us. Master said nothing. He took off his pullover and asked the abhyasi to wear it. The abhyasi accepted it gratefully. Immediately all of us expostulated with Master, each one of us offering his own pullover. Master refused our offer, and sat down with a quiet child-like smile on his face. I, for one, felt ashamed that none of us had been able to think of a brother abhyasi’s distress, but 67

My Master

consoled myself with the thought that Master is unique, and none can be like him in his quick perception of the needs of others, and his immediate and active response to that perception.

I have seen this same small but significant drama played over and over again, but to me it comes as a new revelation every time, and the wonder of Master’s love never fades by repetition. It is a pity that a silent witness to this drama is often more touched by it than the recipient himself, who often prefers to take away the pullover as a souvenir.

On another occasion, again at Shahjahanpur, I was lying in bed, tired out and with an ache in the lower limbs. I was alone in the room. Master came in unannounced and I quickly sat up to greet him. He asked me what was wrong and I told him about the pain in my legs. He immediately sat down to massage them.

I fiercely remonstrated with him and prevented it.

Master said, “Why do you feel it is wrong? Have you not massaged my legs and feet so many times? Now when you are in pain it is my duty to serve you to the best of my ability.”

I told Master that as a disciple of his I could not allow him to massage my legs. Master laughed in a rarely beautiful way. His eyes which are ever dry, even they became a little moist. He was lost in reminiscence for a moment.

Then he said, “Look, I will tell you one thing. Once I had bad pain in my legs. I was lying alone in bed.

Suddenly I heard Lalaji Saheb asking me why I was in bed. At that time Lalaji Saheb was already in the Brighter World. I answered him that I was suffering 68

Love

from pain in my legs. He offered to massage them but I remonstrated with him, and Lalaji became silent. Yet a few seconds later I felt a wonderful vibration in my legs.

Look here! What my Master was doing for me. He was actually massaging my legs for me. Where can you boys get a Master like him? My pain left immediately.”

And strange to say, as Master concluded this revealing episode of Lalaji’s sacred love for my own Master, my leg pain seemed to vanish too.

On yet another occasion I was a witness to what has been, to me, one of the most moving experiences of my life. The experience of those few moments left me shaken, moved to the very foundations of my being, and in tears.

It was just after dusk on a long summer day at Shahjahanpur. A senior preceptor from the South had come on a visit. Master asked him to have dinner, but he declined, saying that he generally ate only one meal a day. He offered to have a glass of milk instead. Master asked one of the younger abhyasis to fetch two glasses of milk, one for this gentleman and one for my father. The glasses of milk arrived after a few minutes, and these two walked away with them, deep in some discussion between themselves. I was left alone with Master. I asked Master whether I could fetch him a glass of milk too. Master smiled infinitely sweetly and, with a look that had profound compassion in it, answered, “I cannot afford to drink milk.” I was shaken to the core by this simple, loving utterance. I did not know what to say or do, but merely sat there in his benevolent presence with tears streaming down my face.

This secret drama of divine hospitality has become such a cherished memory, and so much a part of what 69

My Master

I know of my Master, that even now, as I write this, I am profoundly moved by that memory. Alas! How weak and puny we are who, seeing all, are unable to emulate him in even the least of his gestures.

These, and similar unnoticed dramas have sown the seeds of love for the Master in many many hearts now scattered all over the world. Every new expression of Master’s divine love strengthens us in our love for him.

This is the secret of Master’s magnetic hold on all those who come into contact with him. Time and again I have seen strangers come into his presence who, when they leave after even a brief chat with him, leave as lovers of the Master. Many have confided that even after a few minutes with Master they have felt as if they have known him all their lives. My Master’s spiritual aid is his invincible love in its purest, holiest form—and what is there that can stand up to it and be unconquered? Others may use power, fear, or temptation as instruments to bind their disciples to themselves. My Master’s sole instrument is his divine love for all mankind which demands nothing in return—or if he at all asks for anything it is nothing but our hearts.

I remember one occasion when Master was visiting one of our Mission centres in South India. The gentleman at whose residence we were staying had arranged a grand lunch for about a hundred and fifty persons. Master ate a few small morsels of the food offered to him, and then sat apart in another room. I quickly finished my lunch and went and sat with him. A little later our host came to Master and asked, “Master, have you had your lunch?

Was it satisfactory?” Master smiled and said everything was good, though he could eat but just a little. The host 70

Love

then asked, “Master, is there anything else I can offer you?” Master quietly smiled and answered, “Yes, you can offer me your heart!” Our host obviously took this for a witty remark, for he laughed and walked away to attend to his guests.

I think that because Master’s love is so pure and holy, his devotees are able to love him for himself alone. Master’s love is so pure and undemanding that abhyasis are able to develop a reciprocal love, purer and undemanding in progressively increasing degrees. As this love develops in the abhyasi, a stage comes when the idea of ‘transactions’ ceases. There is no more the question of love for, or with, an aim. Love is there because one can no longer live without that love for the Master in the heart. It is a strangely surprising and beautiful thing, but at this stage the idea of being loved by the Master seems to lose its importance. What becomes all-important is the love in one’s own heart for the Master.

As this love grows and grows a stage comes when it seems as if the heart would verily explode.

I consider the growth of this Divine Love to be the greatest miracle in the spiritual development of a person. There is no longer even the faintest thought of what Master can give. Even the divine gift of liberation, which Master can bestow by a mere glance, loses its importance. All that the aspirant yearns for is to be with his Master, his true beloved.

As we bestow our love, Master bestows his love on us, and this is grace, this is liberation, and this is the total realisation of the aim of spiritual sadhana. Love itself becomes everything, a potent universe-embracing power, which endows by its very presence consciousness of the highest level, call it Divine, call it Cosmic, call 71

My Master

it what you will. This love carries within it the quality of divine perception, which Master mundanely calls

“reading capacity.”

Even at the ordinary human level we find love opens closed eyes. One who loves sees more than one who does not. Is it then any wonder that Master with his all-loving vision sees all? Is it any wonder that he sees the hunger of the hungry, the pain of the one in pain, and the craving for spiritual realisation hidden deep in the heart of a devoted aspirant?

So, love is a great force which can give us the capacity to ‘read’, and it is therefore quite understandable that persons who use mere intellectual force or power fail to develop this vision in themselves. We must turn to the heart for this divine faculty. Master repeatedly emphasises the need to turn to the heart. In fact, he distrusts the intellect. He has often told me, “The intellect will not provide you with what you want. Its answers are based on the information you provide it.

So decisions of the intellect can be wrong, and even immoral. But if you question the heart you will get the correct judgement. When in doubt refer to the heart. It will give you correct guidance.”

I once asked Master to reveal to me the secret of quick progress in spirituality. Master said, “Create love in yourself, and then see the progress. Really speaking, love can conquer all, and love alone can do this. Everything else, every other force or power, creates a reaction which is not favourable. If you are annoyed you transmit anger, and the other person becomes angry in turn. If you use physical force, that too creates resistance followed by a reaction on its own plane. It is the same with everything 72

Love

else. But if you create love in your heart, then the reaction is also of love and love alone—and see, your job is done! So create love. It is with love that our ancient rishis were able to live in jungles with wild animals all around them. Love conquers even the wild animals.

“I am telling you one thing. If there is love in your heart for the Master, then the Master begins to love you.

If you can bring this about then your work is almost done. The important thing is to knock on the door of his heart so vigorously that he is compelled to open it to you. Then what to say of progress, everything is there for you. What is the abhyasi’s real duty? In my opinion he must do everything to make the Master turn towards him—and once that is done the abhyasi can sit back and let the Master work for him. Who can resist love? As the abhyasi’s love grows, so also the Master’s love grows.

And the Master now begins to think what he can do for the abhyasi. It is no longer necessary for the abhyasi to ask. What is there to ask for when the giver is himself thinking about what to give and when?

“Really speaking, a true Master is nothing but a mirror. What the abhyasi places before it is reflected by it. You understand this? In the Master himself there is nothing. You only take from him what you yourself put into him. Now, I am telling you something. There are people who accuse the guru of being partial to one or another of the abhyasis. Do you see how wrong this idea is? And it is also dangerous, for the idea of distrust and hatred may grow, and these also will be reflected. So we must create love and then see its working. I say it is the most potent power of Divinity.”

In my own experience I have known this love of Master for the abhyasi working miracles. Master’s love 73

My Master

has brought about transformations in the character of abhyasis which no threat or use of power could have brought about. When we are afraid of our Master we do not really change or permit transformation in ourselves.

All that we do is to hide certain sides of our life from him, and thus develop a guilt complex on top of the rest. As this trend goes on unchecked, the fear of Master increases until a stage must surely come when we cannot even face him. At this stage the idea of separateness comes into play. And as this separateness grows we can almost see the shores of spirituality going below the horizon, as if from a ship leaving port.

I once had occasion to write to Master with a sense of guilt in me for something I had done. I wrote to him that I was afraid of even coming into his presence. Master’s reply was very prompt. He wrote, “Human beings commit mistakes. I myself commit many mistakes. We must try to rectify ourselves and try to avoid them in the future. Put away this idea of fear. If you allow it to grow it will interfere with your expansion.” The advice was very clear and precise. I removed the fear from my heart, as if removing a physical object, and have been free of guilt since then.

How does his love work to transform us? When we know that Master loves us, we begin to feel we must deserve that love. This is the first step in self-evaluation which automatically creates co-operation in the abhyasis.

We go on and on, on the spiritual path. To be tempted, or to have to face temptation, is common to all of us. But one who is loved by the Master is immensely superior in his equipment to face trials. At every turn of life when temptations pose a sore trial we ask ourselves, “Would 74

Love

Master approve of this if I did it? What would he feel if I should succumb and fall? Would I not be the cause of much sorrow and disappointment to him if I fail him now after he has bestowed so much labour and love on my spiritual development?”

Such questions addressed to ourselves put the matter in clear perspective and, even in the very process of asking them, the temptation is gone. When we realise this, that the trying situation no more challenges us but seems to have disappeared almost like a mirage, then gratitude wells up in the heart for the grace that averted possible disaster. This in turn strengthens the love in the heart, and so it goes on, every temptation no longer a danger to us, but merely an instrument for strengthening our love for the Master, and making it more and more part of our very essence. Thus love achieves what fear never can, and never will, achieve.

Love does not merely strengthen us, but transforms us into vessels containing Divine love, as it were.

Love for the Master makes us long to emulate him, and to grow into a Person like him. This desire to emulate him and be like him is itself a big leap forward on the spiritual path, as it presents to us, for perhaps the first time, a clear and well-defined goal at which to aim. Hitherto we have had abstract goals like perfection or liberation or the achieving of peace, et cetera. Now the inner aspiration becomes concretised in a definite longing to be like something, to be like someone. The difference between our earlier, undefined longing and this new, concrete aspiration is an enormous one, because it exhibits a definite change in the mental attitude from one of ‘having’ to one of ‘becoming’ and ‘being’. As Master pithily puts it, “Prayer is begging,” and as long 75

My Master

as the idea of ‘having’ or ‘getting’ remains in our minds we are nothing but beggars. But now the change that love creates is subtle and definite. When the desire to be like Master dawns in our hearts, then we cease to be beggars. We are no longer ‘asking’ for something, we are trying to be something, and so co-operation intensifies, bringing our goal within our grasp.

Soon after Master granted me permission to work as a preceptor, I had a short discussion with him on how to do the work of transmission, cleaning, et cetera. He told me a few things and outlined a few techniques to be followed. In conclusion he added, “Think that I am sitting in your place. If necessary imagine that there is a beard on your face and that you are like me. This will help you in the work.”

At that time I did not understand the importance of this advice sufficiently, but I have always adopted this technique, often to the exclusion of all other techniques, and found the work more rewarding. I have found that the more I am able to imagine I am like the Master, the better the results are for the abhyasi. On certain days

‘I’ am totally absent and only Master is there. On such days the abhyasi receiving transmission has the greatest benefit, and reports having the best and most tranquil sessions.

Once Master told me a small episode from his own life touching this aspect of spiritual life. Master had prepared himself for his bath and was going to the well to draw water. On the way a tremendous longing flooded his heart—a longing to be like his Master, Lalaji Saheb.

As this longing welled up in his heart he heard Lalaji’s voice saying, “When this thought has entered into 76

Love

you, you have already become like me. Now nothing is wanting.”

Master has told me of the love that one of the disciples of Lalaji had for Lalaji Saheb. Master told me that it was love of the highest order. “Look here, that sort of love I have rarely seen. You know, he was so attentive to Lalaji that even Lalaji used to be astonished by it. Once Lalaji was attending his office in the Court. It was mid-day, and Lalaji had a sudden desire for a cup of coffee. Now you know that in these parts coffee drinking is even now very rare. It must have been even rarer in those days.

But within a short time of this desire coming up, Lalaji saw this disciple coming into court to see him. He had brought Lalaji some coffee to drink. Lalaji was greatly pleased by this sign of personal devotion.”

Master continued, “Now look here, how attentive he was to his Master’s needs. I will tell you a more wonderful thing. Lalaji used to get up sometimes at night to go to the bathroom. But do you know, he would invariably find that particular abhyasi ready with a pot of water and a towel for Lalaji’s wash. You understand what this means? Even in his sleep the abhyasi had been receptive and alert to his Master’s needs. That is why he was able to get up even before Lalaji himself woke up, and to be ready for him. That is love of the highest quality.”

Impulsively, on the spur of the moment, I asked Master how it transpired that that particular abhyasi did not become Lalaji’s spiritual representative and successor. I could have bitten my tongue off, but there it was, the question had been asked, and I expected the worst for my gross impertinence.

But Master smiled and answered, “You know, every moth can immolate itself in a living flame, but rare is the moth that can immolate itself in a cold flame.”

77

My Master

Once again I was too deeply moved to say anything more. What did this statement of Master’s mean? What was its spiritual import? The answer, hidden behind the words, was clear. Human love, even of a very high order, dies when the object of its love is no longer present before it. Divine love exists forever unto all eternity. It is a love which has penetrated into the most secret and mysterious depths of the Master’s being and found Him to be eternally present. Such a love knows no death, acknowledges no absence, experiences no separation.

78

Part II





His Teaching and Work


“I saw Eternity the other night, Like a great Ring of pure and endless Light, All calm as it was bright;

One whispered thus:

“This Ring the Bridegroom did for none provide But for His Bride.”

— Vaughan The Silurist

6





The Way of the Spirit


From time immemorial the religious life has been held up as the summit of human existence. This has been so in all the nations of the world, primitive and advanced. Religious activity has ever been described as the highest type of human activity, and the religious life per se extolled as the perfect culmination to all human endeavour. There has always been a special halo around the initiated aspirant, and naturally the ordained priests enjoyed a far higher special status of their own. The power and prestige of the priesthood or clergy was often of such magnitude as to eclipse that of the temporal rulers of the times.

India has had more than its fair share of religions, having given birth to two of the world’s great systems, Hinduism and Buddhism. India has also been one of those countries where religion has permeated into practically every sphere of human existence. The Hindu religion takes hold of the individual soon after his conception, and releases him only after he is dead, his body cremated, and his ashes ceremoniously offered into the water of a river or the sea. Every aspect of the individual’s life in between these two extreme situations is governed by rituals appropriate to the occasion.

My Master

The great seers of India, the rishis, have bifurcated the holy life into two distinct approaches to Reality; the ritualistic life, and the contemplative life. The texts of Hinduism are correspondingly categorised, and the Vedas themselves come under this categorisation. The earlier parts, dealing almost exclusively with rituals, are classified under the term Karma Kanda. The later portions of the Vedic text, the Gnana Kanda, deal mostly with the mental and higher aspects of man’s approach to his Maker, and are commonly called Vedanta, translated to mean “the end of all knowledge”. Vedanta does not merely mean that this part of the Vedic teaching comes at the serial end of the Veda. It means that here is contained such knowledge as can be considered to be the end of all knowledge, the very acme and essence of knowledge.

The rishis have also taught, very clearly and emphatically, that the ritualistic religious life is a lower aspect of man’s existence, whereas the contemplative life is extolled as being the higher and purer one. The texts themselves are explicit in their statement that formal rules and restrictions apply only to the ritual performances, where strict prescriptions as to place, time and method of performance are to be implicitly followed. In the contemplative life such restrictions no longer bind a person. He has escaped out of the physical rigidity of ritual religious performance into the freedom of mental contemplation of the Divine.

With such a clear enunciation of principles of worship one would have expected to find the people able to follow them without difficulty. But it is mystifying to find that something akin to almost utter confusion prevails. The average person seems to prefer to stick to 82

The Way of the Spirit the bondage of the ritual life. It has this attraction that so long as one obeys the priestly injunctions for a stated period of time—generally curtailed to a few minutes a day—he enjoys a liberty that is almost permissive the rest of the time.

In the contemplative life, or the life of the mystic, there is a freedom that does not exist at lower levels of existence, but this freedom appears unattractive to most persons, as it carries within itself the need for responsible action by the person. Such a person has to prescribe for himself the ethical and moral values that guide his life. No longer can he merely obey a set of rules often elastically interpreted by his priestly guide.

Now the onus of leading a right life is on him, and on him alone. So the apparent freedom of the spiritual life seems to have hidden within it the greater bondage of self-discipline, self-control and so on, culminating in the principle of self-surrender. When this is understood, people seem to prefer the total lack of freedom during a specified period under the ritual life to the apparent freedom of the contemplative.

There was once an interesting discussion on this subject of freedom. An overseas preceptor had been listening to Master talking about the freedom that a spiritual life offered. Master had been talking about this for some time. When Master stopped, this gentleman asked, “But Master, to me it appears that the freedom is becoming less and less as we progress. You ask us to surrender to Master. Is it not then a total loss of freedom?”

Master answered, “Yes, you are right. But I take charge of you only to finally hand you over to God. This can be done only under such conditions.” The gentleman then asked, “But then the freedom does not exist as you say.

83

My Master

What is the real freedom, Master?” Master answered, with a serious expression on his face, “Really speaking the only freedom is the freedom to do the right. There is no other freedom.”

I have brooded over this off and on over the years, and I have come to the conclusion that this is indeed the only freedom.

A motor car on the street has freedom, but only to go where it is permitted. It may not enter a one-way street from the wrong end; it may not exceed speed limits specified; it may park only in areas specifically set aside for this purpose, and so on. Within the framework of these regulations the driver enjoys complete freedom.

Why are these rules, restrictive rules, made? They are for the safety of the driver himself. If there was only one car in a city, the rules need not be so rigid. When there are more, then laws get progressively more in number, and more and more restrictive too. While on its rails a train is free. If it leaves the rails there is disaster.

We think an aeroplane pilot to be a ‘free’ person, and we have, most of us, at one time or the other, been envious of the total freedom that the pilot apparently enjoys. We look on enviously, and wish we were up there in the sky, free to do as we please. But alas! this freedom too is illusory. The pilot is strictly controlled in virtually everything he does. His take-off time is controlled; his route is strictly charted and laid down; his speed is controlled; also his altitude and so on. But within these limits he is free to do as he wishes. An aeroplane pilot has considerably less freedom than a car driver on the road has.

When we see the working of the astronauts we discover, to our dismay, that the freedom of action has 84

The Way of the Spirit almost completely disappeared. Their every action is rigidly controlled. Not merely are the mechanical details such as the times of flight, route, et cetera, all rigidly laid down but even personal routines such as their sleep and rest periods, what to eat and when, are clearly stipulated. It is a matter of wonder that these persons have been able to so completely subject themselves to this rigid discipline and that they are able to perform as required. The reason is very clear. If they did not, they would cease to exist. The penalty for disobedience is the awful one of death, instantaneous death. At this level obedience of the total variety is what is imperatively necessary, as it decides whether a person will continue to exist or not! We thus see that freedom appears to carry the seeds of potential disaster within itself.

It seems clear that at lower levels of activity the apparent freedom of the individual is greater, while the activity itself seems to need a lesser degree of ability for its performance. As the plane of activity rises, the ability needed for its right performance is more and more, while individual freedom appears to become less and less, and simultaneously the need for stricter obedience increases stage by stage. At the highest levels the individual’s freedom seems to be virtually non-existent, to have vanished! The need for obedience is now total; and the ability needed for the correct performance of one’s duty is of the level of the adept. We appear to have arrived at the stage where the only freedom is indeed the freedom to do what is right! But, and this appears to me a significant point, the entire training to bring a person to the level of the adept seems, finally, to culminate in making that person instinctively and completely obedient 85

My Master

to Master’s orders. When a person has progressed to this level there is no thinking, no reasoning. When an order is given by the Master the necessary activity issues forth, almost at the level of a reflex action. This, I feel, is what distinguishes a real adept from a merely capable person who has not developed this ability for perfect, unthinking and instantaneous obedience.

Here we find a law working—as we rise higher and higher our freedom becomes less and less! At least this is apparently what happens. But is this really so? It all depends on our ideas of freedom, the ways in which we have been trained to think about it. After having examined this concept of freedom in quite some detail over many years of puzzled thought, I have come to the conclusion that the ideas I have held all these years are almost entirely wrong. The whole idea of freedom seems, to me, to be illusory. Or rather, to put it in another way, the lower levels of existence, of uncommitted existence, seem to enjoy some degree of freedom; but this progressively shrinks until, at the highest level, there is no freedom at all. But, and here lies the difference, there is no bondage either! The mistake, I believe, lies in identifying a state of non-freedom with a state of bondage. They are not identical by any means.

This is the same mistake we make when we think of a person without wealth as a poor person, or of a person without knowledge as an ignorant person. What we have to perceive is that there is an in between state in every case, a sort of zero point, which is a totally unconditioned state, and this I believe to be the true state of spiritual existence.

To consider this a little further, suppose a person wishes to tell a lie, say about his age. He has considerable 86

The Way of the Spirit freedom in choosing a figure to mention as his age, but to tell the truth there is no freedom whatsoever since the correct figure can be one, and one only. Similarly, the shortest distance between two points can only be one, but many longer ways can exist, and these can be as many as we care to choose. We thus see that to tell a lie, or to follow a wrong path, many ways exist. That is, there is apparently a great degree of freedom. Whereas for right conduct, right speech no freedom exists as there is only one way and we have to follow it.

As a person evolves spiritually, and progresses to higher and yet higher levels of existence, the whole universe of unlimited choice that he had at the beginning has now become narrowed down to just one goal, with but one path to lead up to it. To tread such a path no skill or ability is required, perhaps no knowledge even is necessary. All that is now necessary is an unquestioning obedience of the Master’s instructions. This alone will ensure successful, safe and early completion of the spiritual quest.

This also helps us to see why, in Sahaj Marg, no qualifications are considered necessary in an aspirant.

The sole qualification, as I have elaborated elsewhere, is that of willingness to follow the Master obediently.

In examining this idea of freedom we have been led to the conclusion that what we have thought of as loss of freedom is really nothing but a state of surrender to the Master’s will. We have not lost freedom in the sense that we have been deprived of it. We have voluntarily, wholeheartedly and devotedly surrendered it to the Master of our Soul. We now see why the need for such surrender is paramount. Choice implies knowledge of 87

My Master

how to choose, and will to enforce that choice. Our choice was exercised when we chose the Master and his way. It is like a bachelor who has virtually unlimited choice of a bride, but having chosen one and married her, the question of further choice no longer arises! The time for choice is over. At higher and higher levels of evolution the very idea of choice ceases to exist.

A stage has now been reached where even knowledge is no longer necessary. Many great saints have testified from their personal spiritual experience that a stage is reached when we have to bid knowledge and the intellect good-bye. It is not that we abandon knowledge as being unworthy or incapable of helping us. It served its role, its part has been played out, and the time for it to leave the stage has come, that is all! All that we need now is will, will to act and will to obey the Master in every single instruction.

To those who are fortunate enough to arrive at this exalted stage the Master is no longer a guide for spirituality alone. He has now become the Master of one’s life in all its aspects of existence. He becomes the father, the mother, the son, the teacher, the doctor, in fact there is no role that He does not play in the abhyasi’s life! He has taken total charge of the abhyasi. So we see that only our surrendering to him can bring about a state where he can take total charge of us!

Analysing this further we find, surprisingly, that a great and unimaginable freedom is now conferred on the abhyasi. It is the freedom from freedom itself! It is the freedom of invulnerability. We may even say that it is the freedom of invincibility. We are no longer answerable for our actions. We merely obey. The person who issues the orders, the Master, assumes complete responsibility 88

The Way of the Spirit for everything we do. We are no longer vulnerable to the world. Therefore a great calm, a great freedom comes to us. Out of an apparent loss of a previous freedom, largely illusory as we have seen, we now receive as a Divine gift the true freedom of a spiritual state, a real freedom which some saints have called the “Great Liberation”.

We thus see that where religion binds, spirituality liberates. The great seers and mystics of all religions have taught this, but few have followed them. Many read and hear but few understand. Of those who understand, few are bold enough to shake off the chains of traditional bondage and undertake the quest anew. To these few comes the realisation that they have sought, and when it comes they wonder at the splendour and magnificence of the truth they have been seeking, which its own utter simplicity and proximity have kept hidden from us.

I have discussed the role of traditional forms of worship again and again with my Master. On one occasion I requested Master to elaborate on the drawbacks, if any, of traditional methods of worship.

I asked Babuji, “Master, these ways have been followed for so many thousands of years. How can they be unsatisfactory? Have they not been responsible for our rishis and saints achieving the goal of unity with the Divine? I am unable to follow this. Kindly explain a little more in detail.”

Master answered, “I am not saying the traditional ways are bad or wrong. All that I say is that the method of approach must be correct according to your goal, and if your goal is Realisation then the way must be subtle and correctly followed. So the person, whoever it is, must first determine his goal, and only then arises the 89

My Master

question of the way of achieving it. But the individual person has to decide the goal for himself. Nobody else can do this for him.

“Now suppose you have as your goal the earning of large wealth. You will first look for the person who can help you to earn it. If you want to develop a strong body you will go to a pahalwan or physical culturist. So the goal first, then the guide. The trouble is we see many many persons around us who have attached themselves to one guru or another without knowing why. How many of these persons know what they are looking for? Is it then any wonder that they do not know what they are doing, and why? This is the difficulty, that we blindly do what others have done.

“I am telling you one thing. Discrimination is necessary. We must be able to decide for ourselves as to what is good for us. Confusion must be thrown aside.

Then the goal can be easily reached. But I tell you, people find it difficult to change their ways. Change is always difficult if people have no discrimination or will to change. But as I have told you there can be no progress without change.

“People follow a certain way of rituals or worship.

Everybody sees, and says, ‘Look! What a pious person this is. He is holy!’ and so on. This gives great satisfaction.

The ego is satisfied. Does such a person really want God or Realisation? Think it over! So you see, why we do something is as important as how we do it. You see the basic approach is itself not correct. How can there be success?”

“Master! What about those who are sincere and serious in their search?” I asked.

Master said, “Yes, for them the goal is established as a real goal. Now we come to the marg or way. I have 90

The Way of the Spirit already told you that God is simple and the way of attaining Him must likewise be simple. I have written in Reality at Dawn that to pick up a needle we would not use a crane! My associates appreciate this very much.

Have you read Kabir? He has written that if the water of the Ganga is holy then every crocodile in it should get moksha! You see this? A gross act cannot lead to a subtle result. We must try to understand this.

“We have become lost in our ritualistic way of life. It is generally easy to follow, and gives much satisfaction of having done our duty. But what we don’t realise is that it is adding grossness to us.

“I will tell you of a case which came to me. A person had been doing puja for many years. He used to imagine that God was seated in his heart, and that he was doing pradakshina or circumambulation round him hundred times or thousand times, I don’t remember. One day he came to me. Maybe Dr. Varadachari brought him to me. I don’t recollect. I examined his condition. You know what I found? His heart was all wrapped up like a silkworm in a cocoon! The heart was under great strain, which he did not feel. At first I did not understand how this had happened, but when he told me the method of worship he had been adopting then I understood. See what havoc it had done. Poor man, he thought he had been doing a very pious thing, but really he had put himself in serious difficulties. Do you remember the other experience I told you? The one about the monkey!”

(with much laughter)

I recalled what Master was referring to. Master had personally conducted satsangh at one of our South Indian centres. About forty or fifty persons were present and the sitting lasted about twenty-five minutes. Later, 91

My Master

when we were alone, Master told me that soon after he commenced transmission he got the impression that a monkey was sitting in the group. He opened his eyes and found an abhyasi of long association sitting there.

He closed his eyes and in a few moments the same experience was repeated—the monkey was again there!

Master once again opened his eyes and found the abhyasi there.

Master said, “You know, I could hardly control my laughter. When I opened my eyes this abhyasi was there, when I closed them a monkey was there. Do you know the reason? I will tell you. I examined the case and found that he had been doing Hanuman worship for a very long time, maybe in some past life, and the impressions were there, very strong and deeply buried.

During cleaning the impressions must have come to the surface of the mind. Therefore I had the impression of a monkey sitting there!”

Master has given many similar examples of grossness arising out of wrong approaches to worship. In some cases the grossness is deeply embedded, and so hard, that virtually no help can be given. I asked Master how this could happen, that he himself was unable to help.

Master replied, “I will tell you. I have had some cases where the heart is surrounded by grossness so hard that it is like a rock. It appears as if the heart is embedded in solid rock. If you give transmission in such cases it will just come back to you.”

I asked Master whether, in such cases, nothing could at all be done. Was there no way out for them?

Master answered, “Well, if the power is used it can be done. There is no doubt about it. But the danger is there that in breaking the grossness the person himself 92

The Way of the Spirit may be affected. The process will have to be very slow, and only complete co-operation on the part of the abhyasi can help him. In such cases I suggest that they pray sincerely to God daily for help. Later on the case can be taken up for deep cleaning.”

I related to Master a somewhat graphic experience I had had once with an abhyasi. I was carrying out the process of cleaning when, suddenly, a vision came before my eyes, and I saw a giant sewer, bigger than a man, pouring out sewage of such a filthy condition that I was momentarily nauseated.

Master said, “Yes, that is the work of the preceptor.

I told you a Master is nothing but a sweeper. But the whole problem is only when working in the heart region. Really speaking, the heart region is the gutter of humanity. We have to dive into this and do the work.

Yes, once the abhyasi progresses and rises to the mind region, then the work becomes a pleasure. After that not much effort is needed. A capable Master can do the work by a mere glance. Now I am telling you one thing.

In my own interest I move people quickly out of the heart region. After all who would like to work there longer than necessary? But co-operation of the abhyasi can speed up the process, and save me a great deal of trouble and work.”

Master narrated to me another experience relating to cleaning. On that occasion he had gone to Benares, and unwittingly had strayed into a street with an unsavoury reputation. He instinctively felt that he was in the wrong place. At that moment he heard Lalaji’s voice asking, “What are you doing in this place?”

Master was nonplussed, and answered, “Saheb, I am here by mistake. I do not know where I am.”

93

My Master

Lalaji said, “Since you are here, let the people of this place derive some benefit from your presence. Clean the atmosphere of this locality as you go.”

Master laughed and added, “I obeyed Lalaji’s orders.

Now look at his greatness. He did not chide me for going there. But his love for humanity is seen in his order to me. We must always strive that wherever we may go, we must leave the light of Reality burning there. Lalaji Saheb was transmitting continuously all the twenty-four hours of the day. Even when travelling he would continue to transmit. Where can we get such a Master?

Really speaking, Lalaji is a prodigy of nature!”

Hearing this mention of Lalaji’s name, I was curious to know from my Master whether Lalaji had himself practised any ritual forms of puja. Master fell into a ruminative mood.

He said, “I will tell you one thing. Lalaji Saheb had the greatest respect for tradition. He would never criticise anything or anybody. He taught people what he knew was the best approach to one’s goal, but he always did this without decrying other systems of puja or worship.

That is why he was a very popular person, and people of all castes and communities used to go to him for advice and guidance. They had faith in him because he always gave the correct guidance in all matters. But I tell you one thing, he was much against rituals.

“He had a very pious and religious mother, but she passed away when Lalaji was very young. In her time he used to sing for her. Lalaji had a most beautiful voice which all loved to hear. He used to sing devotional songs, and one of his favourite songs was Dinana dukh haran Nath santana hitkari. It is a great pity that in his 94

The Way of the Spirit days there were no tape records or such things. Yes, he never did ritual worship.

“But I will tell you one thing. One Amavasya day (new moon day) I saw him performing the tarpana. He was pouring water in the ritual fashion, offering it to his forefathers in the higher world. I immediately adjusted myself to see what he was really doing. It was wonderful to observe it. I found that he was transmitting the essence of the water he was offering to the higher world.

Do you understand this? This is what should be done when offering bhog.

“Now I am telling you something. Suppose a person can transmit the essence of a thing, then it is useful to do tarpana and all these things. Otherwise what is the use? It is a mere ritual without any meaning or use. It is better to sit in meditation and think of the departed souls. Surely they will benefit more by it. And if a person is a preceptor he should transmit with the idea that the transmission will reach the soul wherever it may be.

You see, the ways of helping are there. But what can we do if the people stick to the gross forms of rituals out of ignorance and fear?”

On one occasion I had a discussion with Master about temple worship. Master had told me that all religions depended on two instruments, and these were fear and temptation. To Master the idea of anyone approaching God out of fear was totally abhorrent.

“When we are afraid of something, we run away from it. That is the natural reaction. Then how can we go towards God with fear of Him in our hearts! It is not possible. Fear can only turn us away from Him.

I am telling you that any system which depends on 95

My Master

fear will only turn people away from God. Now you see, to counteract this they use the other weapon of temptation—temptation of material welfare, riches, health, and finally of moksha. Now this temptation works to some extent, but people only want what they can see or smell—physical things. So when they seek such sansthas they go only for material benefits. As a result religion has slowly become diluted. The ideals have fallen systematically.

“Now people have come to such a low level that they are prepared to do business with God. You know, I am told that some businessmen make God a partner in their business! Is it not something to wonder at?

What foolishness is this? Everything in the universe belongs to Him and Him alone. What we get, we get from Him. But people have now begun to think that they have ‘earned’ what they have. This is ignorance.

And they add to this by arrogantly offering God a share of their income. Look how foolish and selfish they are.

They think they can bribe God to give them more and more so that He can get a bigger share for Himself!

“So you see all this has to be changed. A person must follow the right way of Love, and seek God for Himself alone, and not for what He can give us.”

I narrated a short version of a long discussion I once had with Dr. Varadachari at Tirupathi about temple worship. Some persons present were of the opinion that we should not try to wean away persons from their own traditional practices as it might do harm. Others felt that temples had been with us for centuries and surely our ancients knew what they were doing when they built them, and established them as centres of prayer.

Dr. Varadachari brought a new angle to the whole matter of temple worship. He explained that few persons 96

The Way of the Spirit were sufficiently developed to attract a living, personal guru. It needed a fairly high level of development before an individual could even think of a guru. What, then, were they to do? Such persons, who were at lower levels of development, formed the bulk of humanity. The great teachers of religion had therefore created the institution of temple worship for this large mass of humanity. To these people the temple acted as an inanimate guru.

Saints of the past had consecrated these temples and charged the idols by filling them with power. Such charges were by no means eternal. They would last for a particular length of time, depending on the power and development of the saint who had charged the idol.

Once the charge was exhausted the temple could no longer confer any benefit on persons who prayed there.

Dr. Varadachari added that this was why some temples fell into disuse and became mere archaeological relics.

He continued to say that the practice of taking a baby and having its head shorn in the temple was in the nature of an initiatory rite. The child was symbolically offered to the presiding deity of the temple, and thereafter the child became a disciple of that deity. Dr. Varadachari then made a very significant statement. He added that when the child grew up into a man, that person should seek a living guru suitable to his further development.

And if he was spiritually ready he would certainly find a guru appropriate to his own level of development. At this stage temple worship had to be dropped and the higher spiritual approach taken up for further development in accordance with the guru’s teaching. This was the gist of Dr. Varadachari’s long talk on this subject.

Master agreed that temple worship had a place in the general scheme. “But,” he asked, “where are the saints 97

My Master

today who have the power of filling power into idols?

If they can do it then there is some meaning in it. I will tell you another thing. If a person who is capable of transmission exists, should we receive transmission from him, or ask him to charge an idol and then pray to it for development? You understand this idea? We must go direct, follow the direct way. We should have no intermediaries between ourselves and God. Of course if one can find a Master who is himself in laya with God, then he can be taken as a guide. Otherwise it is no use.

It is better to be without a guru than to be with a wrong person. Without a guru we may not progress, but with a wrong person we may go backwards and fall. This is the great danger.

“Now I tell you one important thing. Note it carefully. Idol worship is not entirely wrong. It is wrong only if done in the wrong way. What is the right way?

We should not worship the idol, but should worship God whom it represents. That is the correct way. The idol is merely a figure or representation of God to remind the devotee and to help him to bring his mind to a contemplative state. What do we do? We worship the idol itself as God. This is the great error, and so grossness grows.

“Really speaking, God has no form or name. It is we who give these forms and names to God. By doing this we impose limitations on Him. Then grossness begins to form. Look at this foolishness, we should try to expand and grow, but instead of that we are actually trying to limit God Himself! Can such practices ever lead us to the goal?

“I will tell you another important thing. People worship many gods, but we should worship the God 98

The Way of the Spirit from whom all these gods derive not only their power but their very existence. We should go to the Source.

That should be our approach. Anything less than that will make us fall short of the goal and create grossness.

“I will tell you another thing. People do tirtha yatra.

They go from place to place and spend many years and a lot of money in bathing in holy rivers and praying at famous temples. Some do this all their lives. But what is the result? Have they derived any spiritual benefit?

They only get the satisfaction that they have bathed in so many places and worshipped in so many temples.

That is all.

“I am telling you a very important thing. The real yatra is the inner yatra of the Soul. That is the true yatra. This is what we do in our practice. After all, in the spiritual journey it is not the travel of the body that takes us to the goal (laughing). It is the Soul which has become imprisoned in the heart that has to be made to move; and then to go up point by point until the destination is reached. This is the real yatra.

“I will tell you one more thing,” Master went on to say. “There is no mention of temple worship in the Vedas. After all, we quote the Vedas as our authority for everything that we do. But they say nothing about temples. Dr. Varadachari has confirmed this. You know he has studied the Vedas and he is a philosopher. He told me that not only is there no mention of temples in the Vedas, really speaking during Vedic times temples did not exist at all. Does this mean that people did not pray in those times? What it really means is that temples are not essential for prayer. God is everywhere. We must also be able to pray anywhere and this is possible.

“Everything in nature speaks of the presence of God.

Is there anything that does not speak of God’s presence?

99

My Master

The whole universe is His creation and He is in every atom of it. So prayer must be possible anywhere. The idea of setting apart a separate place for prayer is a much later development, when man grew away from nature. In Vedic times man was part of nature, part of his environment, and saw God in everything. That is why they worshipped rain and thunder and fire and all these things. It is a pity foreigners have misunderstood this, and said that the Hindus worship these material elements. This is not the correct idea. Really speaking, the ancients saw God in everything and went into ecstasies, and prayed to everything as Divine. They did not worship fire but worshipped the God that fire represented, and similarly with other things. This is the same idea I told you about idol worship. But later these ideas became debased.

“Now I want to tell you a good definition of prayer.

Our Master Saheb, Mr. Ishwar Sahai, was once asked what prayer is. Master Saheb said it is really an expression of gratitude to God for all that we receive. Now we eat rice and wheat and ghee and so many other things. We are naturally grateful to them. But can we say, ‘thank you rice, thank you wheat’ and so on? No! So we say thank you to the Creator of all these things, and that is God.

“So prayer should really be a feeling of gratitude in our heart, not begging for more things. If we ask for more and more it only shows ingratitude for all that we have already received, and I consider it to be the greatest crime against God.”

Master continued, “By Lalaji’s grace we have an easy way of achieving our goal. It is the most natural and simple way that he has made available to us. It is really a Sahaj 100

The Way of the Spirit Marg—a simple and natural way of God Realisation.

But I am telling you, few persons appreciate its efficacy because they wonder how something so simple and easy can yield such wonderful results! People have become used to following difficult methods, methods requiring long years of strenuous practices. And now when we say God can be easily attained, they are suspicious about it.

But if we are wise we must choose the correct way to lead us to our goal, not the most difficult. They prefer to beg for more and more material benefits whereas in our method we receive Divine grace from the beginning.

“I have said prayer is begging but meditation is receiving. Why? Because when we sit for meditation we sit in a receptive attitude so that a vacuum is created in the heart. Only an empty vessel can be filled! Who can fill a vessel that is already full? You see the difference?

They beg (laughing), while we receive! This is the greatness of our system.

“It is Lalaji’s grace that such a simple system of greatest efficacy is available to us today. But few take advantage of it. What to say, many people even say they have no time! I prescribed one hour for the morning meditation originally. Now I have reduced it to half an hour. Even this people are not willing to do.

“I will tell you an enjoyable story. A person once came to me. He was a big officer of the government at Delhi. He came to me with one of our associates. He wanted to know something about our system and so I told him. When he heard that he had to meditate for half an hour he said it was impossible, as he was too busy to spare so much time. So I asked him to reduce it.

He again said he was too busy. I then told him to do ten minutes a day. Look here! He got angry. He said, ‘What 101

My Master

is this tamasha! I am telling you I am a very busy man and you are going on asking me to do it. I cannot spare even five minutes a day.’

“Now Lalaji gave me an idea. Look how he helps us!

I asked this officer, ‘Can you tell me whether there is anybody more busy than you?’ He got angry again. He said, ‘What a foolish question this is? Of course there are people more busy than I am. The Prime Minister is much more busy than I am!’ I then told him not to take an extreme example but to think of someone just a little more busy than him. He said his neighbour was a bigger officer and more busy than himself. So you know what I told him? (exploding into laughter) I told him, ‘Saheb, give me the difference between your busyness and his busyness. That will give some time for meditation.’

Poor man, he thought I was making fun of him and he went away quite annoyed.”

Master then told me another instance of like nature when a person claimed he was too busy to meditate.

Master said, “You know what I told him? I told him God is to be blamed for not creating the day with more than twenty-four hours in it. It is God’s fault. If he had created the day with twenty-six hours such busy persons would have had time for meditation.”

Master added, “I have told you, only he will get whom He chooses. So what can I do? Anyway we do our work and leave the rest to Master.”

102

7





Approach to Reality


How and when does the search for an undefined goal really commence? In most cases the first faint stirrings of longing seem to be lost in the childhood memories of the individual. Many aspirants testify to this fact that the first spiritual stirrings, the memory of such stirrings, lies in their adolescence, but became buried under later pressures of worldly existence. In a few fortunate cases the yearning came up to the surface again once the person had settled down in life. In the majority of cases, however, the reawakening of spiritual desire had to await the onset of middle age, and in many such cases the reawakening appears to occur, or to have occurred, only at periods of personal crisis. In quite a few cases the first stirrings of late childhood lie dormant and latent, to find re-expression in old age. In such cases the chances of success are far less than in other cases unless they are able to attract Master’s attention by love and devotion.

Master once told me that he had done something really important for an aged abhyasi. He said, “Look here, he is an old man and so out of pity I have given him this as a gift. I did it because he is very devoted and sincere. Old people do not have much time to work, so I

My Master

give them like this, but you young persons will have to work for your development.”

Coming back to the question of the beginning of the search, this depends on the individual, and on the environment and the nature of its pressures on the individual. It is generally accepted that the seed is within the individual as part of his karmic or samskaric heritage. The seed, however, has to find the appropriate environmental conditions for its germination. The subsequent conditions have to continue to be favourable for the seedling to grow into a tree of full stature. Such environmental conditions have to be created, first and foremost, in the family or domestic environment. Here in the cradle and by the hearth the seed may germinate, given right conditions. If this early environment is antagonistic to the germination of the karmic impulses to spiritual search, the later struggle, if it happens at all, is liable to be a long and bitter one. A study of the early life of the Grand Master and my Master reveals that they both had serenely pious parents, particularly mothers, with a positive attitude towards the higher life. Their respective family atmospheres were therefore congenial and fostered such development.

I remember my wife Sulochana once asking Master when a person should commence spiritual sadhana. She asked this because Master does not normally permit persons below eighteen years of age to meditate.

Master answered, “Really speaking, the process should begin with conception. Lalaji used to say this, that this was the correct moment for commencing sadhana. But how to fix the moment of conception? It is not possible, and so the work cannot be practically commenced then.

104

Approach to Reality Therefore, what we do is to transmit to the mother while she is carrying, and the transmitted power will automatically reach the baby in correct dosage. One should never transmit direct to the child—this can be highly dangerous. But we should only transmit to the mother, to her heart, as we normally do.”

Cases where a mother is herself on the path, and thereby is able to confer the divine gift of spiritual training while the growing baby is still part of her, are very rare. But what Master said serves to emphasise the need for the real search to commence as early as possible—the earlier the better.

I had a friend and colleague who was interested in the spiritual life, but in a rather timid and distant manner. I had tried to get him to start meditation. He always kept putting it off saying that he was yet young, unmarried and had plenty of time for “this sort of thing”. His objection to commencing spiritual practice was that he had yet to go through the mill of family life, and therefore sadhana of any sort would be premature until he had gone through that particular mill. He got married.

I again spoke to him about sadhana, but his reply now was that as he had just been married, he needed some more years to get used to that life. He requested me to wait until he was fifty years old when he would certainly take up spiritual sadhana. The tragic part of the matter is that within two years of his marriage he suddenly passed away after a brief and minor illness. It is one of my great regrets that he could not be brought on to the path when the possibility was there.

A second case comes to my mind, more fortunate than the preceding one. This concerns an abhyasi who 105

My Master

was, at that time, the only abhyasi from his city. He showed great interest in our system of meditation, and practised the meditation according to my Master’s teaching. He was developing so well that Master had him in mind for future work in his city as a preceptor.

Unfortunately, he suddenly fell ill, and after a very short time he expired. I wrote to Master about him. Master replied that he had examined the matter and that he found the soul of the abhyasi sitting bewildered in a corner. He added, “I have done what was necessary for him. He will be reborn once more, and the next life will be his last.” He ended the letter with a most significant sentence. “Had he practised our meditation for even a few months more there would have been the possibility of liberation in this life itself. As it is, one more birth will be necessary.”

I am referring to these two cases to drive home as strongly as possible the urgent need for immediate action.

The possibility of liberation is now, in the present. Who can say what will happen in the future? ‘Never put off till tomorrow what you can do today’ is more relevant to spiritual sadhana than anything else.

I will record a third case, narrated to me by my Master himself, to show how putting off the quest may delay it indefinitely, perhaps for many lives.

Master said, “Look here, persons who come to me are generally at the first point. The yatra has not commenced.

This is the normal thing. Once a person came to me, and what to say of him, I found him already at the fourth point. It was a high level of attainment and showed his work in his past life. He came to me once, but never returned again. His samskara must have prevented it.

106

Approach to Reality If he had come back his progress was certain. A little cleaning would have made quick progress possible. It is a pity that he never came back. Now who knows how many lives he may need to find the way! It is the only case which came to me already so highly developed.”

This shows us the imperative need of achieving our goal in this life itself. We are here. Our Master is available to us, and this life is certain, whatever be its length.

Our solemn duty to ourselves is to ensure that with his assistance we complete our journey to our destination within this life—the only one we can be certain of.

As Master himself explained to me on a different occasion, this life is one that we are sure of. We are living it. It needs no proof that it exists. As regards the past life or future lives, different religions teach differently about it. The important thing is that, for our purpose, the whole question of past and future lives becomes irrelevant to the issue of spiritual realisation. We are here living this life; the Master is with us; and the goal exists; a combination of the three factors must enable us to reach our goal in this life. This is the importance of Sahaj Marg teaching.

I personally may believe in past and future lives. This has been the teaching of the religion into which I have been born. Such a belief may therefore be natural to me.

But a similar belief in other persons is unnecessary as far as spiritual practice is concerned. All that concerns us now are the supreme and perceivable truths of our existence, of our Master’s existence, and of the existence of a goal to be realised—here and now!

On yet another occasion someone raised the question of many lives being needed to reach the goal. He quoted the Bhagavad Gita where Shri Krishna says that even 107

My Master

people of great knowledge reach Him only after many lives.

Master said, “It may be so. But I am telling you an important thing. It is a sign of weakness to think that the goal is far off and the journey a very difficult one. I say at least start the journey, then you will know what it is really like. Otherwise it is only weakness to go by what others say. You take at least one step in the right direction and see how it is. Then decide. I am telling you another thing. Everybody who comes to me says this thing requires many lives. But why do you assume that this is your first life? Why don’t you think this is your last life and therefore in this life itself the goal must be reached? You understand what I am saying? One is a way of weakness, the other is a positive approach. Who can say with certainty how many lives we have yet to live. I say it is in our hands to decide it. If we adopt the right process under the Real Master then there need be no future lives. So forget this idea of more lives. We must not look to the next life to continue our journey.

Who knows in what environment we may be born, and how our life is going to be moulded? It is easy to lose the way. I say, once you find the Master and the method, stick to them. Bind the Master to yourself in such a way that the bond is a permanent one. Then success is assured.”

Having examined when the search begins, let us see how it begins. Master has recorded his own personal experiments with ritual performances of religion, and subsequent yogic practices advocated by hatha yoga followed, finally, by his graduation into the life of spiritual sadhana. He started his experiments even while he was a schoolboy. What we have to note carefully 108

Approach to Reality from his life is that his experiments were conducted sincerely and meticulously. When the methods proved insufficient for the realisation of his personal goal he abandoned them. He did not allow himself to be made a prisoner of methods which could not help him. The methods received a sincere and fair trial and, when found inadequate, were abandoned. He had the great courage to do this because he knew precisely what he was looking for. He was not for satisfaction of the ego, he was not for fulfilling society’s dictates; he was not for name, fame or riches. What he wanted was God and God alone. So, having tried many approaches, he abandoned them, and resorted to direct prayer to God, praying that God should give him a worthy guru who could guide him to God Himself. The prayer, as we all know, was answered, and Master’s contact with Lalaji was established. The way was at last found, and the quest achieved momentum, culminating in the supreme achievement of Brahmalaya.

A yearning for something, we know not what, exists in most hearts. Many of our abhyasis have confided details of their early search. Some were able to find the Master easily, and to come to him quietly with easy and immediate acceptance. Others had to go through long and tedious years of variegated disciplines, often with despair in their hearts, sometimes with danger too, until they came to my Master. Many of the latter have tearfully conceded that their early experiments were unnecessarily prolonged only because they themselves lacked the will and personal courage to abandon a way that had been found unhelpful, and which they knew could not lead them to their chosen destination. What kept them chained to a useless practice was the superstitious fear of possible retribution. It is a deplorable fact that there 109

My Master

are gurus who add fuel to the fire of such superstition so as to keep their disciples chained to themselves in permanent bondage for selfish personal gain.

Master teaches that God is simple and therefore the way of attaining Him must also be simple. Master is very often requested to define God, or to describe God, or to give an idea of who or what God is. Master’s characteristic answer on every such occasion is, “God is God. What else can be God? Now I tell you one thing.

God cannot be known, but he can be experienced.”

This is a clear indication that knowledge cannot serve us where God is the object or goal of our seeking. The presence of God can be felt, can be experienced by us, and the technique to acquire this experience, to undergo this experience, is what my Master teaches as a practical path.

I remember a discussion about God at Hyderabad many years ago. Master had come to Hyderabad for a short visit. He was accompanied by his permanent companion, Shri Ishwar Sahai. Talking about God, Shri Ishwar Sahai tried to show that the difference between man and God is neither one of form, nor of content. He described the difference in terms of purity and subtlety.

He used, as an example, the atmosphere covering our earth.

“The air at the ground level is the same as that say fifty miles up,” he said, “but that near the ground is heavy, dense and impure. As one goes up higher and higher the air becomes purer and purer, and lighter and lighter, until at the very top its qualities are characterised by such purity and lightness that the very existence of air is to be doubted.” Using this analogy Shri Ishwar Sahai 110

Approach to Reality said, “Man is heavy, gross and impure, whereas God is light, pure and subtle.”

This analogy gives us some idea that qualities or attributes of Divinity do not lie in the physical realm.

All that we can do when trying to describe a divine spiritual experience is to use analogies. In the Bhagavad Gita, Shri Krishna, the avatar, is himself driven to this contingency. When talking about himself to Arjuna, his devotee, he is forced to use analogies. He says that among rivers he is the Ganga, among birds he is the Garuda, and among men he is Arjuna... and so on! This clearly shows that not even God the Almighty can describe himself. He can however reveal himself to his beloved devotee, as Shri Krishna revealed himself to Arjuna.

This draws attention to two important truths of the spiritual search. The first is that God or Reality cannot be known but can be experienced. The second is that this experience itself is possible only when the Ultimate chooses to reveal itself to its devotee, or to whomsoever it may choose to reveal itself.

Master has often told me of the great importance of attracting divine grace towards oneself. Master said, “I am telling you a most important secret. All abhyas is purely preparatory. Abhyas by itself cannot give anything. It is only a way of turning His benevolent gaze towards us.

Really speaking, only those persons get divine grace to whom He himself wishes to give it. This is a great secret I am revealing to you.”

I asked Master how to bring this about, how to make the Almighty Master turn towards us. Master laughed and said, “You are asking me to reveal to you one more secret. I tell you this is worth a lakh of rupees! There is 111

My Master

only one way. Love Him so much that He begins to love you. You must knock on His door so hard that He hears and opens His door to you. Then your work is over. The secret is Love. Who can resist it? God is only waiting to give Himself but it is a pity that no one turns to Him.

“In this country the people were known for their spiritual achievements. Now look at the people. Gross materialism has taken command over the people. Who is responsible for this? The people themselves are responsible for it. They can improve only if they turn towards Him and adopt the right way of approach.

“Now I am telling you another thing. You will find everybody talking of God. In India it is the biggest topic of conversation and discussion. Everyone talks about God. Great numbers of books are written about such subjects. Also everybody prays to Him. Then why is there so much misery and corruption? I will tell you.

The approach is wrong. The way of worship has to be changed.”

I requested Master to elaborate a little. “What is it that is wrong with the methods adopted, Master?” I asked.

Master replied, “You know the spiritual way. You yourself are following it. Have you not noticed the change in you? You have also had experiences which you have not had before. This you have yourself reported to me. So it is clear, we must follow the right path. I have written in Reality at Dawn about this. Now people spend a lot of time and money on gross forms of worship. But what is the use? They become grosser and grosser. It is what is happening. Anybody with eyes can see it. A gross form of worship can only lead to gross results.

“I have written that God is simple, and therefore the way to achieve Him must also be simple. But people 112

Approach to Reality like to follow difficult paths and spend a lot of time and money. Why do they do this? I will tell you. They get satisfaction from such worship. Now look here, people worship for satisfactions! Or if they are a little more developed they may do it to get peace of mind.

See how much we have fallen. We do not worship to get God. We worship to get satisfaction or peace of mind, or some such thing.

“I will tell you another thing. Even a thief prays to his God before leaving his home at night to go for robbery. Look here, he prays to God to help him in this too! I was told that during the war all were praying for success in the war. In England the English people were praying in their churches for victory, while in Germany and Europe they were also praying for their own success in the war. You see this, how prayer is used.

“I have said prayer is begging. In prayer we do nothing else. It is all begging. God give me this, God give me that—it goes on. As we get more we want more, and so this begging is endless.

“I will tell you an enjoyable story. A sannyasi went to the Mughal court to ask for some gifts from the Emperor.

He was admitted but told to wait as the Emperor was at prayer. The sannyasi said he was himself a holy man, and so would like to sit by the Emperor if this was permissible. He was taken in and asked to sit outside the prayer room. He heard the great Emperor praying aloud, ‘God give me victory over my enemies, give me more kingdoms to rule so that your greatness may be manifested on earth,’ and so on. The sannyasi got up and started walking away. The Emperor turned round and asked him to wait, saying he would soon be free as his prayers were coming to an end. The sannyasi did not heed this but continued on his way. The Emperor 113

My Master

asked him to stop and asked him why he was going. The sannyasi replied, ‘I came to beg of you for some charity but I find you yourself are begging. What is the use of my begging from another beggar? I will beg from Him from whom you are begging!’ And he departed.”

Master laughed hilariously when he concluded this story. Then he became serious and said, “Even when I joke there is meaning in it. You see this tamasha (joke) of a great Emperor being a beggar!”

Master continued, “You see, all this is a result of desires. Our desires have no limit. We get more, and then we want yet more, and this goes on and on. We only become bigger beggars, nothing else. So today we are a nation of beggars. We think of God only when we want something. God is never thought of for His own sake. Is this not foolishness? If we have God we will have everything, whereas when we possess material objects we only possess perishable things. Everything material will perish. It is only a question of time. We must look to imperishable things.

“Desire is not bad. I have said that kama or desire is not bad. Really speaking, it is divine. Rather it is Divine creation. Kama and krodha, love and anger, are both divine. Only our desire must be for God and God alone. Then the desire is used rightly, as a force, to guide us to Him. The same power of desire, if wrongly applied towards material possessions takes us away from Him.

It is so with all power.

“Power, by itself, is neither good nor bad. How it is applied or used is what determines the quality of its use.

They say power corrupts, but I say power can elevate and liberate us if the power is used rightly. Power, by itself, neither corrupts nor makes us noble. It depends 114

Approach to Reality on the way power is used. That is why spiritual power is rarely given to persons until they are purified internally by the methods available in our sanstha. This is a very important thing. How can you blame a child if it cuts itself with a knife you have given it? That is why in our sanstha there are safeguards against misuse of power. In Sahaj Marg I may say this misuse is impossible.

“By Lalaji’s grace we have a system of training where the abhyasi is purified as he progresses from stage to stage. What does this mean? As a person grows in spirituality he becomes purer too, so that at the highest levels he is absolutely pure. To such persons power can be safely entrusted. They will work under the guidance of the higher consciousness so that wrong use, deliberate or otherwise, is impossible.

“Normally you will find people applying power out of ego. Then power becomes dangerous. In such cases the power is used for self-importance and not for the good of others. You will see this everywhere. In such persons power of course will corrupt. To tell the truth it will add to the existing corruption. There has been no moral purification, no preparation of the ground. In fact, such persons are not to be blamed. They work under the compulsion of their samskaras. Really speaking, it is the fault of the persons who entrusted power to such people.

“You see how purity becomes very important for right work. Intelligence, wisdom, all these are good in their own way. They are also necessary up to a point.

But purity is essential. Without it no real work can be done. You understand this? And here the heart alone can guide us. Just refer to the heart for guidance and it will give you the answer.

115

My Master

“This is the reason why we start with the heart in our sanstha. If the heart is purified then that purity extends throughout the system. The circulation is controlled by the heart. Really speaking, this is where the process must really commence. Other points are there as have been taken up by other systems, such as the point of the nose, the point between the eyebrows, and so on. But we start with the heart. We take up the heart for our work.

Other points for concentration may be good for siddhis, for acquiring powers and for limited growth. When we take up the heart under our system we ensure that purification goes on side by side with spiritual progress.

This cleaning is very important.

“Really speaking, at the earlier stages of sadhana under our sanstha it is very important to do this cleaning regularly. As the purification goes on by removing the impression of past samskaras, the possibility of progress is opened up. So this cleaning is very important. You remember the example I gave you of a case where I had to clean the impressions of a previous life? You see how deep these samskaras lie? It may be necessary to go back even more. That is why I say a true preceptor or trainer is one who can read the past life. Of course this may not be necessary in every case.”

When Master spoke of the safeguards within the system I recalled an experience I had on the 15th February 1967, the day following Vasant Panchami. On Vasant Panchami day I had been granted Provisional Permission by Master to transmit and train people in spirituality. This was at Shahjahanpur. The next day I arrived at Lucknow. One of our abhyasis from Lucknow came to know of my having been granted permission 116

Approach to Reality and requested me to give him a sitting. He wanted to be the first person to receive a transmission through me.

I agreed, and we sat in meditation.

I did not know what to do. I prayed to Master that the transmission may begin and whatever was supposed to happen may happen. After about ten minutes I suddenly had a vision which was as clear as if I was seeing it with my open eyes. I found myself sitting with the abhyasi in front of me. A wall was on my right. It had a door in it, which now opened to admit Master. Master walked through the open door with a chair in his hand, set the chair near me and sat down on it. He then proceeded to keenly observe what I was doing. After some moments the vision vanished.

I recalled this to Master and Master said, “Yes, wherever a preceptor may work it always goes on under the Master’s supervision. The power itself is the same whether I transmit or some other person transmits, but it is released according to the need of the abhyasi and according to the ability of the preceptor. It is a mighty force, and has to be carefully regulated. But you see it can do no harm. You have seen this yourself.”

Master then related to me an experience of his own.

Master had been greatly impressed by the love and devotion of one of the abhyasis who was even then a senior preceptor of the Mission. This abhyasi’s love attracted Master very strongly towards him, and Master was restless to do something for him.

Master said, “This person has great love for me.

He is a man of great love and devotion. My heart was restless to give him something. He came to see me when I was at Vijayawada. I asked him to sit in meditation.

I wanted to raise him seven points. Look here, seven 117

My Master

points!! Do you understand what that means? Several lives are necessary for such progress. But his love was very great and I determined to do it. I moved him up one point, then two points. I had taken him up three points when I heard Lalaji’s voice. Lalaji was angry with me. ‘What are you doing?’ my Master asked me. ‘Do you want to destroy him? Stop this nonsense!’”

Master laughed and said, “Of course I had to obey the Master. It was a direct order! Now you see the care that Master takes in the work? It is a very potent force, our transmission, and has to be used very carefully. But the checks are there. No harm can ever come from it!

Later on the abhyasi wrote to me and said that for one month he had been having headache which was almost unbearable. But you know what he wrote? He wrote to me that even though he was suffering from the headache he prayed to me not to remove it because there was also some enjoyment in it! You see, in my excitement I had done this and it was too much. So Lalaji was taking care.

I often do this in my eagerness to prepare persons. But the checks are there. No harm can ever come from it!”

To illustrate that the Master’s supervision also works in the other direction of knowing the abhyasi’s needs, I relate a personal experience of my own. Master had come to Madras and was staying with his son Chi. Umesh at Besant Nagar. I had gone there one morning to spend some time with him. We were just three or four of us there. Master was preoccupied, morose and very taciturn.

In fact, he had been like that for the past few days and we were all worried about it. He is normally so cheerful and gay and lively that his moodiness worried us. We had been sitting silently for about an hour.

118

Approach to Reality Suddenly Master got up, with signs of urgency, and asked me, “Are you free? Can you come inside for a few minutes?” I was of course free and followed him into his bedroom. Master closed the door, spread a bed-sheet on the floor and asked me to sit on it facing his cot.

Then, surprisingly, he himself put on his cap and sat down in a corner, also facing the cot. Master said, “Sit in meditation. Lalaji Saheb is here (pointing to the cot) and wishes to transmit to you!” I was awed, and sat in meditation. The sitting was one of the briefest, lasting hardly three minutes. Master said, “That is all,” and I opened my eyes.

Master appeared ecstatic. He came to me and said,

“Sabash! I am very happy today. You know, I have been wanting to do something for you for the past three or four days, but I did not know how to do it. I was thinking about this when Lalaji said, ‘Why are you worried about this? If you cannot do it send him in to me for a few minutes. I shall attend to it myself!’” Master was immensely pleased. He hugged me and said, “I am very pleased that you have been able to attract Lalaji’s attention towards you. May you grow spiritually.”

I was too moved and choked with emotion to reply.

I merely touched his feet in adoration. This was the first occasion when I had a direct transmission from Lalaji, the Grand Master. I am relating this to show that Master’s watchfulness is not merely a negative check to prevent misuse of power. It is, on the contrary, a positive awareness to ensure correct and timely use of the Divine power for the spiritual benefit of the abhyasi. This is the sole consideration.

Several years ago I was made to participate in an event which dramatically emphasised this aspect of 119

My Master

my Master’s work—the care with which an abhyasi is looked after, and his inner needs satisfied. I had gone to Tiruchirapalli on some work and, having completed the work in the forenoon, I had the afternoon to myself. I decided to visit my maternal uncle who was then residing at Tiruvarur, about fifty miles away from Tiruchirapalli.

I left Trichy at around eleven o’clock in the morning and arrived at Tiruvarur at 1:00 pm I started to hunt for my uncle’s residence, which was not easy as I did not have his address. I had assumed that I would be able to easily locate his residence as I was under the impression that Tiruvarur was a small town. I had not visited Tiruvarur before. However, the job of finding my uncle proved more exhausting than I had expected. After inquiring at half a dozen post offices, and after calling at several addresses suggested by the postal authorities, I had to call off the search. I finally decided to leave Tiruvarur as it was already four o’clock, and I had to motor a long way back to Madurai.

I left the centre of the small town, and took my road back. While driving through the market place I stopped for a drink as I was feeling very thirsty. I bought a drink from a small betel shop and, while I was drinking it, I was approached by a person whom I did not remember to have met before. He greeted me, and said that he was an abhyasi of the Mission. He said that the whole of the previous night he had felt miserable and abandoned, and that he had spent the whole night weeping and praying for Master’s grace. Even as he was telling me this tears welled up in his eyes.

He added, “Sir, you do not remember me. But I have seen you in Trichy two years ago when you came with Master. Here there is no centre, and I feel totally 120

Approach to Reality abandoned. I feel that my tearful prayers of last night have brought you here. I am grateful to Master for sending you to me. I request you to kindly come to my room and give a sitting.”

I accompanied him to his room and gave him a sitting. He was profusely and sincerely grateful for this sign of Master’s grace.

After I left him and started on my way back to Madurai, I thought about this apparently trivial occurrence. I marvelled at the whole matter, as it became evident to me that the whole thing had been planned, though not by me! The idea came to my mind that workers of the Mission and of the Master are really like mobile police squads, who are sent where required.

I had come to Tiruvarur on my personal business, but Master had diverted me on his! Such is my Master’s love for his abhyasis.

This episode revealed to me that where there is true craving and yearning in the heart of an abhyasi, the Master’s help is ever present, and unfailing in its work.

121

8





The Role of the Guru


The guru occupies and plays a fundamental, decisive and all-pervasive role in the spiritual life of an aspirant. He may appear to be a mere guide playing a limited role at the commencement of practice but, in a perfect and growing guru-disciple relationship, his role becomes greater and greater, and encompasses more and more of the aspirant’s life. Finally a culminating spiritual condition is reached where the aspirant’s life, in its entirety, is governed and motivated by the guidance of the Master. This is the generally accepted position under Sahaj Marg.

When we study gurus, as such, we find that they range from simple teachers of ritual and scriptural texts at one end of the spectrum, to the Supreme Guru of spirituality, one worthy of being called a Master, at the other end. In between these two extremes there are gurus of all shades of practice and precept, filling variegated roles including those of teacher, priest, mendicant, astrologer and so on. Many head organisations of their own, called mutts, while a large number are nomadic and wander the length and breadth of the land. The latter are often novices themselves, undergoing prescribed penances and practices in their own search for salvation.

But since they wear the ochre robes of the sannyasi they

The Role of the Guru are universally revered as gurus. As a matter of fact the institution of sannyasa can often be confusing as far as differentiating between a student and a teacher is concerned. The sannyasis form the bulk of gurus in India. The householder guru is not much in evidence, thanks largely to the teaching of Advaita Vedanta which, as interpreted by famous gurus of the past, prescribes celibacy as a rigid pre-condition for embarking on the spiritual quest.

It is an important aspect of my Master’s teaching that he has set out to make God available to all. And not merely that, my Master teaches that the householder is the person who can be expected to have in him the growing spirit of true spiritual vairagya or renunciation.

Master has time and again stated that it is in the family environment that true vairagya is developed, while performing one’s duties. The sannyasi system, on the contrary, encourages runaways and drop-outs who seek the system merely as a refuge from the demands of a family existence. Sannyasa thus encourages weakness, and adds to the already exceedingly large number of itinerant wanderers who live off society without contributing anything significant in return. This is a burden that, in the present context, society can hardly continue to bear, in terms of both materiality and the higher life.

The common run of humanity in India knows that the religious life cannot even be commenced without prescribed initiatory rites being conducted by a priest. Into every individual’s life a priest therefore finds entry sooner or later, and thereafter the priest generally becomes the guru of the members of the 123

My Master

family which he has summarily adopted. Under the prevailing conditions it is therefore common to find that most persons in India claim a personal guru among their cherished possessions. The guru is rarely changed because of superstitious fears of bad luck, or a fear of being cursed by the rejected guru. Such a guru generally becomes a patiently borne burden, and the religious life degenerates into a hypocritical bargaining game, the householder struggling to minimise his expenses on rituals, while the guru or priest uses all his wit, persuasion and battery of scriptural armaments in an effort to maximise his own income. The family deity is a mute witness to this religious battle of wits conducted in his very presence but, having been imprisoned inside an idol, can say very little about it. There are priests who sincerely believe in the supreme efficacy of rituals, and who perform rituals with complete faith without greed or avarice, but they are few.

All this is somewhat confusing particularly to people from outside India, especially to those on their first visit, who, after studying our literature, come to this country with a pre-established veneration for the institution of gurudom. Most of them are mystified when they find a small fraction of the population claiming to be world-gurus, heads of mutts, leaders of cults and sects, and teachers of yoga—and therefore gurus not merely by divine dispensation but in their own right too.

The confusion is further magnified when they see even the disciples of such gurus parading as lesser gurus.

Such confusion on the part of overseas visitors is not surprising because only a small and minute fraction of the Indian people themselves seem to be aware of the real qualifications a person must possess before he can 124

The Role of the Guru become a guru. The confusion is so great that mere reciters of prayers, ochre-clad mendicants and astrologers and occasionally even the boss in the office have been adopted as gurus.

The guru is expected to take on the karmic burden of any person that he accepts as his disciple. In this karma-ridden land, people are generally very anxious to find a guru on whom to dump their accumulated load of karma.

It would appear that almost anyone willing to accept this burden is therefore acceptable as a guru. People are unwilling to look deeper. There is rarely any positive aspiration to spiritual progress, the attitude generally being merely to get rid of accumulated karma.

Since the office of guru traditionally carries pecuniary benefits and benefits in kind, the position is really attractive to a large number of persons who easily slip into this role. It is therefore not surprising that gurudom has deteriorated to a mere profession, and not a very noble one at that, attracting the least equipped persons to this high office. The majority are mere tricksters and charlatans who shamelessly deceive a gullible public, aided by a coterie of chelas or disciples whose sole duty is to loudly sing the glories of their lord and master while protecting him from the too inquisitive public gaze.

This is the level to which this institution, once august, holy and venerated in the highest degree, has now degenerated. Notwithstanding the general corruption and lowering of standards, a few sincere and exalted souls do exist even today, who live disciplined and prayerful lives dedicated to the service of humanity.

However, all this in no degree reduces the real need for a guru of calibre to guide one’s spiritual life and to 125

My Master

aid in one’s development. The need is as imperative as it ever was. But the search for a guru, in modern times, is a long, hazardous and complicated affair, which can even border on heartbreak because it is worse than looking for the proverbial needle in the haystack! It is not surprising that many sincere souls have had to waste a considerable portion of their lives in such a search for a real guru.

One of our own associates from abroad told us of the saga of his own personal search, a saga of no mean proportions. He had come to India again and again some six or seven times with the sole intention of searching for, and locating, a person whom he could accept as his guru to guide him on his spiritual journey. On each of these visits he had spent several months visiting ashram after ashram, meeting guru after guru, journeying to holy places one after the other until, in his own words, he could hardly have missed a single ashram or guru of any importance or reputation between the Himalayas and Kanyakumari. His deep sorrow was that in this land renowned for spirituality he could not find one person whom he could whole-heartedly accept as his guru. He was on what he had decided would be his last visit to India, and had again gone around visiting ashrams and gurus. At the end of his travels, just two days prior to leaving this country for good, destiny led him to one of our preceptors, and thus his spiritual contact with Master was established.

He has indeed been very fortunate in locating his guru, but for every successful search there are literally thousands where the persons have had bitter, frustrating and sometimes even tragic experiences. There are abhyasis with us who have spent a major portion of 126

The Role of the Guru their lives in the search for a guru, many of whom have suffered loneliness, deprivation, impoverishment and even extreme humiliation before fate gave them the courage to break away and look afresh. Some have related harrowing tales of what happens within the closed confines of some of the ‘ashrams’, and the personal physical dangers that they had to face when breaking away from them. Some of these escapees have even been threatened with dire consequences if they did not give up their new association with my Master and return to the fold.

As far as finding a real guru of calibre is concerned, there is indeed poverty in this land of plenty, a land replete with gurus.

I had discussed this matter with Master on one occasion, pointing out to him the difficulties many of our abhyasis had to face. Master smiled quietly, but remained silent. I pressed him to say something.

Master said, “The real search should be an inner search. A person may go from place to place all over the world, spending his whole lifetime, and yet not succeed in finding a guru. The mistake we make is in looking, or searching for a guru. The right way is to pray for a guru. What should we do? We should pray direct to God, with deep longing in our hearts, that He may send us a worthy guide. And when we are ready for him the guru will himself knock on our door. I have told you how I got my Master. It is His grace. So the search should really be one of prayer, an internal search, and then success is assured.”

This should serve as an eye-opener to all who wish to follow the way of spiritual living and wish to look for a guide for this purpose.

127

My Master

One of our Western abhyasis testifies to the efficacy of such an inward, prayerful search. This person had yearned for spiritual growth for many years but had been unable to find anyone to help. The person then fell into a mood of great despondency and despair. The divine spark in the heart was however quite active. The person made a solemn resolve to sit daily in prayer and to pray sincerely for a guru, and to do this exactly for one year.

If the prayer should be answered, well and good. If not, well, the very aspiration to follow a spiritual way would be abandoned once and for all.

The prayer was sincerely done every day. At this stage, ‘miraculously’ as the abhyasi said, contact was established with my father who was then in Rome. My father received a letter requesting him to go over to the abhyasi’s home town. How this person came to know of my father’s presence in Rome was never divulged—it was, and continues to be, a mystery to him to this day.

My father went there, gave this person several sittings, and established a centre of the Mission at that place.

This case is a clear and glorious testament to the efficacy of sincere and heart-felt prayer. The guru did come to the person. Agony was there, of course, as this person has told me again and again. But it was a personal and internal agony, cleansing and purifying in nature, capable of orienting the succeeding prayerful state in a definite direction. And success followed quickly. This clearly proves that what my Master told me is possible—

if such proof should be needed.

One of the roles of a true guru would therefore appear to be that of awaiting the call of a devoted heart, and responding to it. When one goes deeper into this matter, 128

The Role of the Guru one finds that even this is a superficial view. What really happens is that Master “prepares the field”, as he puts it, by continued work of a spiritual nature. Receptive souls are attracted towards him, and the contact becomes a direct spiritual contact. It would be appropriate to say that the aspirant, ready for the spiritual path, waits at home in a prayerful attitude inviting the guru to come to him. This is the simplest and the best way, as one can rarely know even where to seek the guru, should one set out on a journey to seek him.

“All things come to him who waits,” says an old proverb, and this applies most pertinently to the coming of a guru into a person’s life. The guru, on his part, is putting out spiritual feelers, as it were, and when the feeler finds a receptive person there is information fed back to the guru. He then commences the preparation of the abhyasi forthwith, by transmission.

Physical contact between the guru and the disciple may come very much later. The exact time of occurrence of the personal relationship is unimportant insofar as the abhyasi’s preparation is concerned. Frequent personal contact is largely for the abhyasi’s personal satisfaction, and lack of such personal face-to-face contact in no way interferes with one’s progress when one has a Master of calibre, capable of transmission, and who is himself in Brahmalaya.

That this is what happens is borne out by Master himself. Master told me of how he had started ritual puja, followed by yogic methods and so on, finally praying to God to grant him a capable guru. He came to the divine feet of Lalaji when he was twenty-two years old.

Some time later he came to know that Lalaji, wishing to know who would carry on his work, had meditated 129

My Master

on this, and my Master’s face had come up in his vision.

Lalaji had immediately commenced transmission to the person he had seen in his vision. This was many years before they met. Master, correlating the times, discovered to his amazement that the time when Lalaji started transmitting to him coincided with the time when he commenced his own boyhood prayers in the prescribed ritual fashion under his mother’s guidance.

Master told me, “Had not Lalaji commenced his transmission to me, even the prayer may not have been performed by me. It was his transmission which awakened the impulse in me, and put me on the road to spirituality.”

In one of his public lectures at Allahabad, Dr.

Varadachari spoke about this aspect of spiritual life. He said, “My Master has been able to pick his men from all strata of society. I say ‘pick’ even though it seems to us that we walk in. When we contact him then a direct relationship, after a preliminary cleaning, is effected with the Divine.” He also stated in his lecture that Master had told him, “Not only do I choose the man but, having drawn him to me, I give myself unto him.”

So the very first lesson we learn is that one who is eager to follow a spiritual way of life, and earnestly wants to hand himself over to a guru, should sit in prayer day after day and seek the guru in such prayer to the Almighty. The guru will then come to him when he is ready for him.

This, then, is the very first role of the guru. He prepares the field in such a way that his spiritual power flows into the selected field, finding a place in the 130

The Role of the Guru receptive hearts of yearning aspirants. In such hearts the power of the Master immediately commences the work of transformation. The aspirant is not aware of this work being done on him. The guru works in secret until the time for a face-to-face meeting between him and the aspirant comes. At this stage the aspirant becomes a disciple, and becomes conscious of the work his Master is doing upon him. The work, so far carried on in secret, now comes out into the open. The seed has germinated underground, and the seedling has now put out its head into the glorious sunshine of the outer world!

It is of the nature of cosmic work that creative processes are carried on in secret, away from the prying eyes of all but Mother Nature herself. This appears to be a universal law. When the creative process is completed then only is the result of that work made manifest.

Thereafter the process is one of growth. The creative stage is over, the growth stage of the work comes on.

This is precisely when the work is brought out into the open. We thus see that the most important aspect of Master’s work, the preparation of the field of the work, and the seeding of the individuals therein, is carried on in that very secrecy which veils Nature herself!

This explains why my Master’s work needs no publicity or propaganda for its furtherance. He works alone, using the divine power placed at his command.

The work is secret in its essential, creative aspect. Not only is publicity and propaganda unnecessary for this work, they may very possibly damage it if used in the early stages of the work.

It is worth noting that from the time Master commences preparing the field, to the time that the work develops in a public manner, the time interval is, 131

My Master

or rather has been in the past, of the order of twenty to twenty-five years. I would not say this is standard, by any means. As the work develops it is sure to gain momentum, but the ‘visible aspect’ of the work, as the earlier analysis possibly indicates, is the growth stage.

It is therefore only at this stage, when the work has been revealed to the public gaze, that the question of publicity invites consideration.

To illustrate this first stage of Master’s work I would like to relate the case of a person who is now a senior preceptor of the Mission. It was about fifteen years ago that this gentleman read a review of Master’s Reality at Dawn in the newspapers. He wrote to Master, evincing interest in the Sahaj Marg method of yogic training offered by the book. Master replied that his services were at the disposal of this gentleman, and requested him to give the method a trial by sitting in meditation. Master requested this gentleman to give him prior information as to when he wanted to sit in meditation so that he could transmit at the appropriate time.

Relating this story this gentleman told me, “When I got Master’s letter I decided that while I would sit in meditation I would not give him prior information about it. After all he claimed to be able to impart the training by transmission. So why should I tell him in advance? In a sense I wanted to test him. Thinking like this I sat down to meditate the very next morning. It was a most wonderful experience. Within moments of my sitting I felt a tremendous power flowing into my heart. It was as if molten lead was being poured into me.”

This gentleman realised that Master was not dependent on his information to commence his work.

132

The Role of the Guru His divine work had commenced much earlier. It was only necessary for the abhyasi to feel it by an act of conscious participation in the work.

In a sense, this first stage is the most important stage of Master’s work. In another sense it is also perhaps the stage which is easiest for him. At this level of functioning there is no resistance because the aspirant, being unaware of the work being done on him, cannot offer any resistance to the work. There is no conscious receptivity or co-operation called for since the aspirant is ignorant of the Master working upon him. His own yearning or craving acts as a powerful force which attracts Master’s grace into him, and this alone acts as the strong co-operative factor in enabling Master to work on him.

The conscious wielder of spiritual power, the Master, has a degree of co-operation from his unknowing partner, the aspirant, which he but rarely receives in the later stages of his work.

Once the Master’s relationship with the aspirant becomes formalised and assumes the guru-disciple relationship the work comes out into the open. Then his problems really start. It is now that the disciple can resist the Master’s work, consciously or otherwise. At this stage the disciple is aware of the fact that he is being worked upon. He begins to question the efficacy of the power, of the existence of the power, then the source of that power itself. He perhaps also begins to doubt the Master’s ability. And so it goes on, doubt upon doubt, and then resistance grows. We see that at the conscious level the resistance can be considerable.

Yet it is not very difficult for the Master to overcome this resistance because conviction can be brought to the abhyasi by reasoning, by example and by asking him to observe the result of Master’s work upon him.

133

My Master

A degree of trust can thus be created which, as the work progresses from one level of consciousness to higher levels, from one level of being to yet higher levels, develops into faith, then into love, culminating finally in surrender. If, however, the resistance is subconscious then the work can be much more difficult and prolonged.

Master has aptly and graphically divided aspirants into two classes. One class is apparently highly co-operative at the conscious level, but the resistance is all inside, hard as a rock, and this class Master compares to the mango fruit which has a soft, pulpy exterior, but a hard stone inside. The other class of abhyasis are externally and consciously tough. It would appear that they do not agree with anything the Master says or does.

Resistance appears to be considerable. Yet, inside, the co-operation is something extraordinary. Such individuals are compared to the almond which has a hard shell on the outside but a soft, sweet kernel inside.

If one is observant one can see this division among abhyasis clearly. There are abhyasis who are very pliant and soft, and apparently co-operate in the highest degree, but who make very slow progress, and in certain cases none at all. They stick on to the system year after year. In one such case I have even felt that a degree of injustice was being done to the abhyasi. He had been in the Mission for many years even when I first met him, but I found Master always very critical when talking to him. It was when I asked Master why such an apparently co-operative soul was being treated somewhat harshly that Master explained this point to me.

“Look here,” he said, “he is very soft and says he has surrendered completely to me. But inside he is like a 134

The Role of the Guru rock. There is stubborn inner resistance. I have tried to help him but the transmission will not enter his heart.

His heart is closed up. It is just reflected back. You see the problem? How to help such a person? It can be done but it is a very long process, and he has to be patient and try to create co-operation within himself.”

I was somewhat taken aback by this explanation. I asked Master how this sub-conscious resistance came up all of a sudden, particularly when the craving was strong enough to have brought him to Master. I could well understand that conscious resistance could crop up in one type of abhyasi. This is a normal occurrence in inter-personal relationship, and one which is easy to understand. But how could sub-conscious resistance crop up of a sudden? This was my perplexity.

Master said, “I use the word sub-conscious merely as a common usage of this term to indicate that it is a state of mind of which the abhyasi is not aware or conscious. I don’t like to use the word ‘unconscious’ because that has a different meaning altogether, though it is not really incorrect. I will explain it in a different way. It is the samskaras which are creating this resistance. Sometimes the samskaras are so deep that they are difficult to overcome. Regular cleaning is necessary for a long time.

This is the effect of samskaras—I mean this resistance.

So you see, such persons have to be patient and try to create co-operation. There is one further difficulty. On the superficial or conscious level they are very anxious for development. But there should be no anxiety. Anxiety means doubt is combined with it. Craving is what is needed. A single-minded longing for realisation is what is needed. But these people mistake the surface anxiety for craving and co-operation, and so change of attitude becomes very difficult to bring about. When I tell them 135

My Master

this thing, generally the resistance is further increased.

Now what can I do? So I work in my own way—of course time will be taken for it.”

This brings us to the second stage of Master’s work—

cleaning and purifying the abhyasi to make quick progress possible, and to consolidate that progress.

What is it that is cleaned? Master’s general answer is that the whole system has to be thoroughly cleaned.

This includes the heart and the higher points one after the other. The main work is on the heart and the heart region where much of the samskaric residue lies buried in the form of grossness. Master teaches that when we act in any way—the word ‘act’ being taken in its widest meaning to include all sensory activity and mental activity—the action leaves an ‘impression’ which is called a samskara when it is very deep.

It is clear that the superficial impressions are easily cleaned off. It is easy to wipe a slate and clean it. But it is not so with a gramophone record, for instance, where the impressions have been made deep enough to form permanent grooves. When we become ‘involved’ in our actions the danger of deep impressions being formed is much greater. The accumulated impressions which are in us form the samskaric burden of the past. This has to be cleaned by the Master by the use of his own spiritual power. As this cleaning proceeds the abhyasi experiences actual ‘lightness’ during his meditation sittings.

I had a personal problem in this connection which I once discussed with Master. When I first started meditation a great number of thoughts used to come up and intrude but, on following Master’s technique of not attending to thoughts, the inrush of thoughts became 136

The Role of the Guru progressively reduced until I could experience intervals of thoughtlessness. But, and this was my problem, after a few years of sadhana I suddenly found thoughts of a most sordid and vile nature coming during meditation.

Naturally I was considerably perturbed because I was apprehensive that this might indicate not progress but regress.

Master quickly cleared the problem up for me. He said, “You see, the dust that settles every day on the table can be easily dusted off. It is superficial and easy to remove. Suppose ink has been poured on the table and allowed to soak, then the cleaning is more difficult. So the nature of the impression makes the difference.

“Now I tell you one more thing. We sometimes have bad thoughts, I mean consciously. We feel ashamed and push them down. Now the very bad or worst thoughts are hidden away deep inside the mind. So in cleaning they may come up last of all. In your case this is what has happened. You should be happy that these vile thoughts have been removed at last. Progress will be quicker now.

Do you understand this? It is like a pond. The leaves and dust float on its surface and can be easily removed.

But heavy dirt sinks down, and effort is necessary. So in cleaning it comes up last. So there is nothing to worry about.

“But I am telling you it is important to remove the day’s accumulation the same day itself. Otherwise tomorrow it will have become a little more hard and solid, and require more effort. That is why I prescribe daily cleaning by the abhyasis themselves. This process, if correctly followed, will remove the day’s accumulation.

The rest is the Master’s work. So you see the importance of daily cleaning?”

137

My Master

On one occasion, several years after I had commenced sadhana, I went to Shahjahanpur. Master had been telling me that my progress was good and that he was generally very satisfied with it. He gave me an individual sitting which lasted over half an hour. At the end of it he said,

“Now I have cleaned your system and removed the grossness.” I was a bit perturbed to hear this because I felt that there could not be much need for cleaning. I told Master that I had done nothing consciously which could have added grossness to my system. He had also been writing to me praising my progress. I requested him to explain how this grossness had now come into me to need cleaning.

Master laughed and said, “You should not worry about this. It was not much, but you know I am a perfectionist and I cannot bear to see even a single dark spot in the system. I will tell you one thing. On a black shirt a dirty patch or spot will not show, but on a clean white shirt even the smallest drop of ink will stand out and invite attention to itself. Anyway it is my concern and you should not worry about it.”

But I pressed Master for an answer as to how this grossness came into being.

Master replied, “However pure our action, some impression is always there. This is inevitable at the human level. I also get grossness, which my Master cleans whenever necessary. Another thing I am telling you. When we sit in meditation there is a craving in the heart for something. This creates a vacuum, and grossness from the surrounding atmosphere is attracted and becomes deposited on us. A person who is meditating properly therefore accumulates some grossness like this also. That is why if there is one saint 138

The Role of the Guru of calibre in a country it is enough. He attracts all the grossness of the whole place and takes it upon himself.

That is why I have said that a saint is the target for the world’s sorrows! I will tell you another thing which is very surprising. Grossness can actually come from the parents and forefathers too! I have found this in several cases, where the grossness has been handed down like that. So you see, this can happen in several ways but you should not worry about it.” This ended the discussion.

At a subsequent discussion Master emphasised the importance of cleaning as related to progress. Master said, “By Lalaji’s Grace we have a method of training which I can say is of unsurpassed efficacy. Do you know what makes it such a wonderful and easy system? It is the cleaning process followed under Sahaj Marg. Really speaking, it is our past impressions which hold us down and create patterns of behaviour which we are unable to modify. We are the slaves of our past. We think we are free to think and act as we like but, truly speaking, this is a fallacy. We are conditioned in everything by the past.

Now how to change a person under these conditions?

This is Lalaji’s greatness that by this process of cleaning he makes it possible to completely remove the effects of the past, in stages of course. You see what a great boon this is.

“What is the use of telling a person he must change? Of course everyone would like to change, but it is not possible. Why? Because the mind is conditioned by the past. So you see, change can come only by cleaning the mind of past impressions.

This makes it possible for the abhyasi to be slowly liberated from his past. Really speaking, this is our only 139

My Master

bondage. Our past impressions create tendencies in us which we find difficult to change. When the impressions are cleared, the tendency can be changed easily and, in many cases, automatically. Then thought and action become correct and natural.

“Therefore, to transmit is not enough. Cleaning is very important. Otherwise the abhyasi may progress but the danger of fall is always there because the impressions of the past can drag him back. If progress is to be made permanent, purification of the system is essential. That is why I ask our preceptors to pay more attention to this aspect of the work. It is a very important aspect. But much hard work is necessary particularly at the lower stages. So sometimes there is a tendency to ignore this, but then that is a dis-service to the abhyasi. We are here to serve the abhyasi, and if cleaning is neglected then we are not really serving him. This I tell again and again to our preceptors.”

This subject of cleaning crops up again and again in my discussions with Master. It is a process to which he gives the greatest importance, and to which he also ascribes great efficacy. At one such discussion session I asked Master how long this need for cleaning would exist.

Master laughed and said, “This depends on you. If there is complete co-operation then the work is easy.

Suppose I go on cleaning and the abhyasi goes on adding more and more grossness, than what can I do? So you see the abhyasi must co-operate too. He must modify his life in such a way that it is helpful to his progress.

To remove past accumulations is the Master’s work.

But the abhyasi should be alert that he does not add more grossness by his own thoughts and actions. So this 140

The Role of the Guru alertness is necessary. And if the daily process of self-cleaning is followed, then by Lalaji’s grace a stage can be reached when the formation of impressions no longer takes place, and samskara formation stops. This is a very high stage, but really speaking it is but the start of the journey. Once samskara formation stops then the goal is in sight. The past accumulations may be there, some residue of it, but that is Master’s responsibility.

“But I tell you one more thing. As long as we are in this body some grossness will always be there. If the system becomes completely pure then life cannot remain here. But (laughing) we should not create grossness in ourselves to prolong our lives! But when samskara formation stops it is a sign that the goal is coming near us. Then the person lives and works normally in every way but no impressions are formed. This is the condition which I have called the ‘living dead!’ But to arrive at this condition the abhyasi must co-operate.

“How to do this? I will tell you. Suppose I see a beautiful rose, I admire it. There is nothing wrong in it. But I must not look at it again and again and create strong impressions of its beauty. Then the impression forms on the mind. If the impression is strong enough we want to go back again and see it, and this further strengthens the impressions. Then the desire to possess it comes into play, and if we yield to it, action begins. So you see a simple thought, if allowed to go on unchecked, can lead on and on to action, and then its result, I mean the result of that action, must inevitably follow. So a train of events is set up and we are caught up in it. That is why we must be very alert.”

Master has clarified that by impressions he means both good and bad ones. Good impressions are no 141

My Master

better than bad ones. Both are equally undesirable as they create impediments to progress. This is a pointer to an important aspect of Master’s teaching. A good life, one that has been conducted on principles of good conduct, charity, adherence to religious codes, et cetera, is not sufficient to make ‘spiritual progress’ possible.

For this something more than a life of mere social and ethical goodness is necessary. All these form samskaras.

Such a life may grant a better future life, but our aim is liberation. So all these concepts are of no value to the abhyasi under the Sahaj Marg system.

To what ultimate levels this applies was revealed to me when I once discussed the religious practice of reciting sacred mantras into the ears of a dying person.

Such mantras are called karna mantras and are said to be highly effective in guiding the departing soul on its onward journey to its goal. The mantras are said to work even if spoken into the ears of an unconscious person who is dying. The only stipulation is that the person be not dead. I asked Master about this. Master became pensive.

He said, “Because you are asking me sincerely I will tell you. There is no use in this for spiritual progress.

Yes, it may grant the person a better rebirth, but what is the use of that? Our idea is not to be reborn, however good the next life may be. Our aim is liberation. Now I am telling you the correct thing. At death the mind should be made a complete blank. No thoughts must be allowed to come into it, not even of gods or anything like that. It must be made completely blank so that at death it can merge with the Source where the condition is that of nothingness.

142

The Role of the Guru

“And I tell you, for the abhyasis of our sanstha this is very easy because this is what they are taught to do every time they sit in meditation. To us this becomes second nature. When we sit in meditation the mind becomes thoughtless, and so what we are experiencing, to put it in one way, is a condition somewhat like that at death. You may call it a condition of death-in-life if you like. So when the time comes we automatically get into this state of mind, and there is no impediment even at the last moment.

“Now you see how much harm this karna mantra can do? It is actually a method of dragging the soul back to this existence instead of allowing it to go on its way. If I tell this to the pundits they will pounce upon me! But this is the correct thing that I am telling you.”

That the cleaning is not confined to the individual human system has already been apparent. A saint ‘attracts’

grossness from the atmosphere onto himself. He acts like a cosmic vacuum cleaner. So cleaning of the atmosphere is another important aspect of Master’s work. As the environment is so purified the effect on people’s minds is significant. Right thoughts come to people’s minds, and so pure actions, or right actions, follow naturally. Thus by acting on a cosmic level the individual is benefited.

In turn as the individual’s spiritual condition improves he affects the environment. And so this goes on. What began at the cosmic level as field preparation culminates once again in the cosmic level after having gone through the level of the individual.

What happens to all the grossness cleaned off in the process? Preceptors are instructed only to remove it and throw it out. What then happens to this? Is there any 143

My Master

way of destroying this? This was the question I asked Master. Master answered that such grossness could be burnt up, but only the Special Personality could do it!

The Special Personality alone has the power necessary to burn it up and destroy grossness. All others can only remove it and throw it out somewhere.

Growth has to be nourished. There can be no growth without proper nourishment. This is the third role of the Master, that he ‘feeds’ the abhyasis with his spiritual transmission and nourishes them, so that growth continues to be strong and healthy. What we call transmission Master once defined as ‘spiritual food’.

The body lives and grows at the physical level, and so sustains itself on physical foods. The soul, being spiritual in nature, needs food of that plane.

I once asked Master whether the transmission was the same in quality or whether it differed with the abhyasi’s condition. Master answered that there could be no change in it as it is the subtlest force or power of Divinity, and hence unchanging. I was a bit puzzled as to how the same power could do everything Master claimed it could achieve, at all levels of development. I put this question to Master.

Master laughed amusedly and said, “When we plant a seed we water it; when it comes up as a small seedling we water it; when it is a strong plant we water it; and we go on watering it all its life. The same water achieves the growth of the plant stage after stage.”

On a different occasion Master described transmission in terms other than what I have stated above. He said,

“The body is alive only because the soul is in it. At death the soul flies away, and then we say the person is dead, and call the body a corpse. So the body lives 144

The Role of the Guru by the soul. How does the soul live? I will tell you.

The soul lives by transmission which we can think of as the essence of Divinity. Dr. Varadachari has called this ‘Soul of the soul’. It is a correct description that he has given. He told me in Sanskrit it is pranasya pranaha which means the Soul of the soul. So, really speaking, without transmission the soul is like a dead thing. The very first transmission makes the soul alive. It is the touch of Divinity itself.

“I am telling you a wonderful thing. Even a single transmission can make a great difference in a person’s future. One transmission from a Master of calibre can transform a person instantly. The power is the same. But the will must be there. There must be an unfailing will.

Then the result is wonderful. Really speaking this is the most important thing, that a trainer in spirituality must possess an unfailing will.

“I am telling you one more thing. When we doubt the efficacy of the power of transmission it really means we are doubting our Master. Then the work suffers.

The power can be given by the Master, but you have to develop will power yourself. After all, in using any instrument force has to be applied. Suppose you want to cut wood and I give you a saw. The saw has to be moved with the full force of your arm. Then only will it cut the wood. Do you follow this? So an instrument alone is not sufficient. You have to use the force of your will to make it work effectively. Really speaking, whether I transmit or a preceptor transmits, the result should be the same. But if will is not behind the transmission then the work is not properly done. So the abhyasi feels the difference.”

145

My Master

The transmission is thus the only spiritually elevating power. This enables the abhyasi to grow from stage to stage, passing through region after region of spiritual existence, and so on to the Goal. Right through this divine journey the Master’s active help and guidance are essential. This is unique in Sahaj Marg that the guru’s role lasts until the abhyasi has been taken up to the highest level of spiritual existence open to mankind. In fact, the need for the guru is progressively more as we grow. Master once explained why this is so.

Master said, “As the abhyasi grows, the transmission and cleaning make yet higher approaches open to him.

But at the higher approaches a resistance develops from above. It is as if nature opposes his development. Here the Master has to use the power at his disposal to take the abhyasi to the higher level. The abhyasi by himself cannot undertake this. There are certain regions where the abhyasi cannot even enter by himself.

“I will tell you one more thing. There are regions which no person can cross by himself. Only a capable guide who is in laya with the Ultimate, and who has travelled the path himself, can do it. At such stages the Master takes the abhyasi inside himself and crosses the region, and then brings the abhyasi out again to continue the journey under Master’s guidance and supervision.

Dr. Varadachari used to joke about this and say, ‘The Master is like a kangaroo!’ You know, the kangaroo has a special pouch into which it puts the baby kangaroo when there is any danger. So this is what the Master has to do for his abhyasi whenever it becomes necessary.”

This exposes to our understanding yet another role of the Master, that of protector.

146

The Role of the Guru We thus arrive at a broad understanding of Master’s several roles which are those of field preparation, seeding of the individual’s heart, nourishing the growth of the abhyasi, and protecting him on his spiritual journey until the goal is in sight. At this stage the abhyasi, according to Master, should have crossed into the central region, and also crossed several rings of the seven rings of splendour in that region. The Master takes him yet further until all the rings are crossed. After this nothing remains but to swim on and on towards the Centre in what Master calls the Ocean of Bliss. According to Master, at this stage the abhyasi is put in direct contact with God. Insofar as the abhyasi is concerned, this then is the culmination of the Master’s role in his sadhana.

I however believe that even though the abhyasi may now be in direct contact with God his relationship with the Master does not cease to exist since, by its very nature, it is a spiritually and eternally enduring one.

I recently discussed this aspect of an abhyasi’s link with the Master even after the Master has connected him to God. Master was not willing to give a direct answer, but suggested that at this stage it was up to the abhyasi to retain his link with the Master, or to go on by himself.

Master said, “For those who need the Master’s help even beyond that stage it is always available.”

With this pregnant statement he became silent!

Sister Kasturi was present. She told me that even at the highest stages of spirituality the possibility of ego developing could not be ruled out. And the direct link with God, established for the abhyasi by the Master, could lead to ego if the abhyasi was not careful and level-headed.

147

My Master

“After all, how is the direct connection with God established?” she asked. “It is by the Grace of the Master alone that this is possible. So how does the question of severing one’s link with the Master ever arise? I feel that when Master makes such a statement to an abhyasi, he is really testing the abhyasi. At this stage we have to be extremely cautious and see that we do not indulge in the supreme mistake of abandoning Master.”

She then related to me a vision of hers relating to this subject. On one occasion Master had told her that a certain abhyasi had been connected direct to God.

However, when she studied the matter, it appeared to her in her vision that as the soul of the abhyasi approached God, it was thrown back to Master. When the soul of the abhyasi strove to approach God once again, the same thing was repeated—the soul was thrown back to the Master.

Sister Kasturi said, “See, brother, this was a direct revelation that the Master’s role never ends; not even after an abhyasi’s link with God is established! Because the journey to the Goal is, in a sense, an endless one.

We are always approaching the Centre, coming nearer and nearer to it, but we can never be at the Centre itself.

That can happen only at the time of mahapralaya when everything is drawn back into the Centre.”

My own belief is that if an abhyasi has sincerely and devotedly loved the Master, then there can never be any thought of cutting his link with the Master. The true connection with Master is therefore an eternal one, whatever stage of spiritual growth the abhyasi may have attained, since the need for Master’s help and guidance is ever present.

148

9





Spiritual Experiences


My Master teaches that few spiritual experiences have real significance and therefore undue importance should not be attached to them as this may divert us from our goal. Persons who give too much importance to experiences are likely to ‘miss the wood for the trees.’ Too much importance has been given to dreams, visions, hearing of voices and the like in the traditional works on the subjects of religion, yoga and mysticism. This has led aspirants to wrongly conclude that where there are no such experiences, something is seriously wrong with their practice of the method.

My Master has emphatically stated that experiences, as experiences, have no value since what should concern us is the attainment of the Goal, and not experiences en route. We may take note of them in the same manner as we note the passing landscape when on a journey. No greater importance should be attached to them. In any case, a desire or craving for experiences is definitely a wrong attitude, and should be changed forthwith.

On one occasion when Master was at Hyderabad, an eager group of persons was around him, asking questions.

One young man asked this question about the validity of spiritual experiences. Master gave his usual answer, that

My Master

we should not worry about them. The abhyasi however pressed for an answer, asking whether such experiences did not denote stages on the journey, and thus were indicators of how far the journey had been completed.

As an analogy he said, “Sir, when I travel from here to Bombay by train, the stations on the way come in a particular order. So by knowing which station we have arrived at I can judge how near I am to my destination.

Surely spiritual experiences have a similar value.”

Shri Ishwar Sahai who was present smiled and said, “What you say is true if I go by train. Suppose I travel by air, then how am I to judge what stages of the journey have been completed? We have then to rely on the captain of the plane to tell us where we are, and how much farther we have to go to reach our destination. Even when the captain tells us where we are the information may convey nothing to us. So this question is to be answered like this.”

The questioner laughed and said, “Yes, I see the point. You take us by air...!”

Speaking in a very general manner, experiences can be classified as falling into three groups. The first group contains experiences arising out of the abhyasi’s own imagination, or as a result of his having projected them himself. Abhyasis, indeed all human beings, are prone to discuss matters among themselves, and to exchange notes on each other’s experiences. In spiritual sadhana this is not advisable since, in the same sitting, different abhyasis may undergo different experiences.

This does not mean that one is progressing more, or faster, than another. Experiences depend on such diverse factors as the samskaras of the individual, his previous background, social environment and so on. If abhyasis 150

Spiritual Experiences discuss each other’s experience, some may feel that they are not getting the right experience from meditation, and may feel dejected. Worse, they may project the same things unconsciously during subsequent sittings and have experiences which are their own creation.

Therefore Master advises abhyasis not to discuss their spiritual experiences with each other, but only with Master himself or with the preceptor. Such experiences are not true spiritual experiences and have no value whatsoever.

The second group covers all experiences arising from the cleaning process. Master has stated that when the system of the abhyasi is cleaned, then the past impressions are removed. When these impressions surface to the mind then the original experience or activity which created the impressions is once again created in the mind. So the abhyasi has an ‘experience’. In general the experiences which abhyasis have are of this category. The visions of gods and goddesses that abhyasis experience during meditation are of this type. Whenever such an experience comes up, it is an indication of a past involvement with that particular deity. I have referred elsewhere to one such experience where Master himself saw a monkey in the place of an abhyasi.

Many abhyasis have startlingly clear visions of gods or saints. Quite a few make the tragic mistake of thinking that the goal has been reached, since their chosen personal god has granted them his darshan. It is a pity that persons who practise without the guidance of a capable Master mistake such experiences for divine revelations, and go back to the traditional forms of worship of that particular deity which appeared to them. Abhyasis have to be on their guard against such misinterpretation of experiences. Many abhyasis report having visions of 151

My Master

gardens, hill-stations and the like. These also belong to the same category. Some experiences may also refer to a previous life. Generally the abhyasi will not be able to know this. But Master and the preceptors will be able to correctly interpret and evaluate such experiences, particularly if they have occurred during sittings with the Master or the preceptor.

The third category contains what Master has referred to as “revelatory experiences”. These are of a very valuable nature as they contain messages from the inner Self of the abhyasi which, if properly interpreted, can help him considerably on his journey. Such experiences may come during meditation sittings, or as dreams. Master has also stated that orders, instructions, and advice from the Master himself can be conveyed in this way.

Some eight months after I commenced the practice of meditation under the Sahaj Marg system, I had a dream.

In the dream there was a narrow river, with a tarred road beside it. On the other side of the road, away from the river, was a large hall. I went up the steps and found an enormous quantity of footwear lying outside the door.

I inferred that there was a large gathering inside. In the next scene I found Master coming out of this hall.

I joined him. Both of us walked up the road along the river. We came to a narrow bridge spanning the river.

We got on to it to go across, and just as we were halfway across I bent down and touched his feet.

This dream was the cause of immense satisfaction to me. At the conscious level I had fully accepted my Master.

This dream now confirmed that at the subconscious level too there had been an acceptance of the Master, and so my acceptance of him was now total. I accepted this dream as revealing an inner condition.

152

Spiritual Experiences A few years later I had a period of depression which lasted about three months. During this period I could not meditate satisfactorily and, if I remember right, I had stopped meditating for some time. At the peak of this depression I arrived in Bangalore on an official visit.

Before going to bed I prayed to Master, telling him that I was unable to help myself in any way, and that it was now up to him to put me back on the path from which I seemed to be straying. I prayed for his guidance and assistance to find the way again. I slept very deeply that night. I woke up as usual at about 5:00 am but strange to say, I went to sleep again, and slept very deeply.

During this second sleep I had a dream. I dreamt I was in a large compound. I entered a large building half of which was an open courtyard, where several women seemed to be cutting and preparing vegetables for cooking. The other half was covered. I entered it.

It was in total darkness. At one end there was a raised dais, and on it was seated a person whom I could not as yet see. As I looked at him some illumination began to glow behind him. I saw his silhouette. Slowly the light became stronger, and I saw Lalaji sitting on the dais, a radiant smile on his beautiful face, his beard illuminated by the light from behind him, wearing a shawl around his shoulders. I stood mute before him. Lalaji spoke to me. He said, “So far you have been meditating in one way. I shall now teach you another method. Meditate on my form as that from which the entire manifested Universe has been created.”

Though Lalaji spoke, the voice I heard was that of my Master, Babuji Maharaj. As soon as I woke up I sat in meditation, meditating as advised for over an hour.

The meditation was very deep and I was in a condition 153

My Master

like that of samadhi. My depression vanished. It was as if a new beginning was made.

When I reported this experience to Master he exclaimed, “You have had a wonderful experience. A secret has been revealed to you. You know what it is? It has been revealed to you that my Master and I are one, though people see us as separate beings.”

Perhaps a year later I had another vivid dream. I dreamt that I was taking evening group meditation in a thatched pavilion with only the roof to it. There were no walls on any side, only poles to hold up the roof. It was twilight, and getting dark. I closed my eyes and started the sitting. A few moments later I had the feeling that all the abhyasis who had been meditating had got up and were moving around. I opened my eyes, and saw that all the abhyasis were indeed moving around but all had their eyes closed. Each one had a dagger in his hand which he was trying to plunge into me. I was frightened and shouted, “Master! Master!” At this stage I woke up.

I referred this to Master. Master said, “It is a good dream. It is an indication that the lower vrittis are being destroyed. It is a sign for further progress.”

When we analyse the situation we discover an important trend. The imaginary experiences and those projected by the abhyasi himself, come very early in a person’s spiritual life and, fortunately, do not last long. The experiences arising out of cleaning may be numerous, and may last for many years depending on the condition of the abhyasi. The revelatory experiences come when the abhyasi is established on the path, and devotion for the Master has filled his heart. There is no 154

Spiritual Experiences set time for this. It may be the very same day on which one commences abhyas, or never at all.

Apart from these experiences there are those that can be created by the power of the transmission itself, when consciously done with such an intention.

I recall going to Dr. Varadachari at Madras one hot summer evening for a sitting. When I reached his residence I was hot and sweating profusely. Within minutes of my arrival he asked me to sit with him in meditation. I continued to feel very hot as the fan was not on. But, strange to say, within two or three minutes of commencing meditation I felt a cool breeze blowing around me. I cooled off immediately. The breeze continued to blow, and I actually felt a little chilly. At the same time I could feel that the atmosphere around me was still as hot as ever. I was puzzled, but enjoyed the cool breeze that seemed to be blowing for my benefit. When the sitting ended Dr. Varadachari asked me what I had felt. I told him of the peculiar sensation.

He bellowed with laughter. His eyes had a mischievous twinkle in them.

“See,” he said, “That is the beauty of this system. I knew you were feeling hot and so I transmitted to you from the water centre. So you felt cool and refreshed. A capable preceptor must be able to work upon the system as a musician plays upon an instrument!”

I heard of a second instance from Master himself.

It was in the early days of his sadhana. He wanted to try the effects of different levels of transmission. He transmitted to an abhyasi from a particular centre which would produce signs of intoxication. Master said, “Now look here, when the sitting was over this abhyasi could hardly get up. He had all the signs of drunkenness 155

My Master

upon him. He was completely intoxicated. This was transmission of a low, material order. This should not be done as there is no benefit to the abhyasi. We must always transmit from as subtle a level as possible.”

A third occasion relates to my father. He had a hankering to visit the holy shrine at Badrinath. He had had this desire ever since his boyhood. We had arrived at Shahjahanpur to attend the wedding of Master’s son Chi. Umesh. My father expressed a desire to go from there to Badrinath, and sought Master’s permission.

Master said, “Why do want to go there? It is dangerous. The roads are bad and a journey now is a great risk. If you are hankering for the experience you hope to get there, sit in meditation and I will give you the experience here itself right now. There is no need to undertake such a troublesome and risky journey for this purpose!”

The implications of this are tremendous. I will relate one particular example to show at what levels such experiences can be imparted to a disciple if Master desires to do so. There had been a lot of new thinking about the moon, several years before moon travel was even contemplated in the West. Our sister Kasturi had expressed a desire to know what conditions were like on that satellite. Master said, “All right. Sit in meditation.

I will try to give you the experience of that condition.”

Sister Kasturi told me that she did have a profound experience and had noted the details down in her diary.

Later visits to the moon by the American astronauts revealed certain conditions which she had experienced many years earlier.

We thus see that one more order of spiritual experience is now introduced into the picture. We have 156

Spiritual Experiences to reclassify the subject of spiritual experiences into two major classes.

The first one consists of all those experiences that an abhyasi experiences by himself during his meditation, with or without preceptors, as well as in dreams. This class is amenable to the three-fold sub-division I have referred to earlier.

The second major class contains all experiences which the Master deliberately induces in us, or makes possible for us to experience. Such experiences can be of any level of ‘being’.

I recall our preceptor, Shri S.K. Rajagopalan, telling me many years ago, of an occasion when a high-ranking official visited my Master. This official desired to be enlightened on various topics. At the end he asked Master what the state of jivan mukti was. Master answered that he could not explain or describe this state but could enable the official to experience it if he so desired. The official said, “I see,” and went away.

Shri S.K. Rajagopalan used to bewail the ignorance of that official which deprived him of a heaven-sent opportunity for immediate grace being bestowed on him. Who can enter such a state, even if it is only for a moment, and ever be the same again?

The experiences Master bestows on us are of this order where each such experience raises us to levels of

‘being’ impossible for us to attain by our own effort.

Such experiences are not mere experiences. They are moments of grace and bliss when the abhyasi basks in the infinite love of the Master.

157

10





The Gift of Liberation


The ultimate aim of sadhana under the Sahaj Marg system of raja yoga is rather loosely designated as being liberation or realisation. These two terms are generally used interchangeably, as if they were synonymous, and represented the same condition or state of Being. Those closer to Master, who have had more experience of Master’s use of the terminology of his system, appreciate that there is not merely a difference between these two words, but the difference is indeed a large and significant one. Sometimes a third term is used, this being ‘the perfect human condition’ or the

‘condition of the perfect human being’. Thus the goal is generally described in these terms, the exact term used depending on the person’s degree of intimacy with Master, and his own growth and experience in the system.

As far as I have been able to understand this subject, it appears to me that liberation is a lesser order of attainment when compared to realisation. In Sahaj Marg terms, liberation is indeed of a far higher level than the traditional religious emancipation labelled mukti or moksha, both of which generally refer to a state of salvation from which there is no return to the physical

The Gift of Liberation plane of existence. They, however, do not preclude rebirth in higher non-physical realms of existence, of which Master says there are many. So mukti and moksha are limited concepts, whereas the liberation of Sahaj Marg yoga offers a permanent release from the chain of births and deaths.

There is a more significant difference. Traditional religion seems to provide, by and large, for release only after death. This is called videha mukti, that is mukti after one has vacated the body. The jivan mukta state, that is the state of release in this life itself, while one is yet alive, is stated to be a very high order of mukti, possible only to a very few. Under Sahaj Marg the emphasis is on the attainment of liberation in this life itself, here and now, while one is living a normal life as a householder.

My Master effects the transformation of the abhyasi by using the Divine force and infinite power available to him. This power is used to awaken the dormant spiritual forces in the person of the abhyasi. By this process, coupled with the process of cleaning, this physical body is slowly transformed by breaking up every atom and reconstituting it until, finally, no tinge of materiality exists in it. For all practical purposes it is a physical, material body both in appearance and function, but in reality it is now a pure spiritual body. Such a pure body is said to be beyond the five koshas or sheaths. Such a body alone can be the body of a liberated soul.

Persons who have attained this state under my Master’s guidance are said to possess such bodies. Such a liberation, where a liberated soul occupies a spiritualised, divinised body and continues to live out its allotted span of earthly existence, is what is offered by my Master. We 159

My Master

don’t have to wait for death to be liberated. This may have been necessary under other disciplines where the vehicle of the soul, the body, could not be purified and divinised to contain a liberated soul. But my Master is able to reconstitute the gross physical body by working on what, for the lack of a better expression, can be called the atomic level into a new spiritual body. This he does by the power of his transmission.

When I requested Master to give a short definition of liberation, Master said, “In one who has been liberated what is first broken is ‘time’. Time is destroyed first.”

This is clear enough as far as it goes, implying that one who is liberated is no longer subject to the sway of time. For such a person all temporality ceases to exist, and one steps into eternity. I have long tried to understand this concept of eternity. The only clear understanding I have arrived at is that eternity does not mean unlimited extension in time. It seems to be of a different order of existence.

My understanding today is no whit better than when I started meditation under my Master ten years ago. But on one occasion I had an experience of eternity which I can never forget. It was towards the end of 1968. I had gone to Shahjahanpur to be with Master for a couple of days while I was on tour in northern India. One morning Master gave me an individual sitting. I felt deeply absorbed, and lost to this world. Towards the end of the sitting, for a few minutes, I suddenly felt myself floating in an ocean of brilliance. Brilliance is perhaps not the right description. Luminescence would be more apt. All around me was nothing but sky—

nothing but sky above me, below me, and all around 160

The Gift of Liberation me. Perhaps I should call it space instead of sky. I was seated in the usual meditation posture, and I was floating serenely in that space which was a luminous soft blue in appearance. There was no one else, nothing else, in the whole universe but me. Not even Master! It was an ecstatic experience. Even when I became momentarily conscious during meditation the impression persisted that I was alone, absolutely and blissfully alone, in the whole immensity of space!

After the sitting Master asked me how I felt. I described my experience to him. Master said, “You have been given a taste of Eternity. This generally comes at higher levels but you have been given it today.”

I asked Master how this state could be made permanent, my own as it were. Master laughed and said, “Puja is the only method. I mean meditation, as we are taught to do it. But I tell you one thing. In puja the head must bend in submission. If you are conscious that you are doing puja then that is not puja. I will tell you another thing. In puja we go to God to receive His grace. God has everything. After all He is God! So He has everything. But what happens when we go to Him?

We go with small bags. What can He fill inside such a small bag? Therefore we must become deserving vessels for His Grace. This is essential. And this is what we do by our practice of meditation and cleaning. We are transformed into vessels fit to receive His Grace when He wishes to pour it into us.

“There is another thing I will tell you. People talk of searching for God. This is not the right attitude, in my opinion. If you search for anything that thing will be hiding from you. If search is there then that thing for which you are searching will make the distance between 161

My Master

you longer and longer. When I know God is there, where is the question of search? Really speaking, searching for God means searching for yourself. That is, the idea of search is cut off. What is the use of wasting your whole life in searching? We must do, not search.”

Master let out a great laugh and continued, “You know your son is at home, but you go and search for him in the market! I will tell you one thing. Search in your house, your heart, and you will find Him!”

On one occasion when Master was present at Madras, I had an individual sitting with sister Kasturi. The sitting was very deep. I felt myself plunging deeper and deeper into a sort of non-conscious state. At the peak of this feeling I found myself in total darkness. There was a pinpoint of brilliance in front of me. I felt I was moving fast towards it. I looked back, and found a small aperture of light there too. By its reflection I could see I was moving fast on some sort of rails. I knew I was inside a long tunnel. I faced forwards again. I moved on rapidly, and suddenly found myself on my feet outside the tunnel, in brilliant sunlight. I found a very large crystal ball some distance away from me. I looked into it from where I was, and found the face and figure of my Master in it. As I walked towards it, and covered half the distance to it, I found the figure of my Master had changed into that of Lalaji, the Grand Master. I continued to walk towards it. As I came up to it, I found the figure had changed again. Lalaji had vanished, and what I found was my own face in it!

I related this experience to Master immediately.

Master was very pleased. He smiled and said, “This is a very good experience. People say lose yourself and find 162

The Gift of Liberation God, but in reality you lose yourself to find your Self.

This is the truth, and I am happy you experienced it in your meditation. It is all Lalaji’s grace.”

Later, the same evening, Master was alone for a brief period. He reverted to my experience and said,

“Meditation is the only way. But it must be correctly done. Meditation really means that the mind may be accustomed to the Centre itself, instead of working elsewhere. At the human level the mind is wandering hither and thither, dragging us with it. It takes work from us! But by meditation we regulate it, and start taking work from it. I tell you an important thing.

The mind is the instrument of realisation. It is also the instrument of our downfall. Now people talk of concentration. Concentration is the method of revelation.

Meditation is the method of realisation. Concentration can reveal the nature of the object or thing concentrated upon, but it cannot lead to realisation. If you want to know the condition of an abhyasi just concentrate upon it, and the condition will come before you. Verify with the heart and it will give you the signal whether it is correct. But I am telling you a very important thing.

Concentration can reveal everything but not God. If you concentrate upon God you cannot see Him because there is no thought! Only the Divine can see the Divine!

“Now people want to reach their goal. But the main difficulty is that people turn their backs to the sun and then search for it. Who is to blame if they find only shadows and not the Reality? If you want to move towards the sun, close your eyes and then walk towards it. Walk in faith. Now the question comes, how to walk with closed eyes. You may stumble and fall. So you need someone’s help to guide you. You need a Master who can 163

My Master

walk to the sun with his eyes open, and who can take you safely with him to your goal.”

Continuing the same subject, Master said, “The Master must be a capable guide, one who has himself travelled on this road and reached the destination.

Otherwise the person cannot guide us. So we have to be careful in the choice of a guide. Such a person must himself have become merged in the Ultimate. Then only he can help us. A guru is for service of others, but nowadays it is difficult to find a person who is out to serve humanity. Rather they want service themselves.

“I will tell you an enjoyable story. A person went to a guru and prayed to be accepted as his disciple. The guru made a lot of conditions. He said the chela must wake up early in the morning and prepare the guru’s breakfast.

Then he must wash the guru’s clothes, prepare lunch and have everything ready. In the afternoon when the guru rests he must massage his feet. It went on like this.

The person listened patiently. When the guru finished, this person quietly said, ‘Please accept me as your guru’!

Is it not an enjoyable story?

“There is no harm in a disciple offering personal service to the Master, but the Master must not demand it. When the disciple needs personal service the Master must be willing to offer it. That is real humility and surrender.

“One who has surrendered to the Ultimate must feel that he has surrendered to the whole of creation. That is the true state of surrender. Really speaking, merging starts from love, and surrender starts from love and dependency. Don’t try for surrender, because when you try the self is there. The real way is to be dependent. Try to create total dependency.

164

The Gift of Liberation

“I am telling you one thing. Surrender is complete only when you feel yourself surrendered to every being even if it is a fool or an animal. A true state of surrender makes absorbency possible. When there is absorbency in the Divine then every cell of the body becomes energy, and then that becomes its own absolute, that is, it becomes Divine!

“Master prepares the field. The Divine does the work of transforming matter into energy, and energy into its absolute. You see the wonder of this work! It all comes when one attracts the gaze of the Master. What do we know of God? A direct approach to God is not possible.

A guru of calibre alone can lead the abhyasi up to God.

“God is the subtlest Being, and you must try to become as subtle as possible. The more subtle you become the better, because by this method you come nearer to God. So please try to become more subtle. My problems are only so long as the abhyasi has not crossed the pind pradesh (heart region). All the work is only in this region. Also much time is taken in this region for the work. After crossing the heart region my work becomes easy. When the rings of splendour are crossed then I have nothing to do with the abhyasi. After that Nature takes up the work.

“Now you may ask, ‘If Nature takes up the work after the rings of splendour are crossed, why cannot Nature do the work in the lower regions too?’ It is a small matter. Nature can doubtless do the work but some persons are ‘permitted’ to do this work, that is all.

Such persons are the Masters of calibre, because when permission for the work is given, the powers necessary for it is also automatically given. This is the secret of Nature that when work is given the necessary power to do the work is also given.”

165

My Master

On one occasion Shri Ishwar Sahai spoke about realisation. His idea appealed to me very much. He said,

“What is realisation? Most people don’t know what this means. Some persons think that when they have a feeling of peace, of shanti, that is realisation. Some people think that if by their practices they get some happiness, that is realisation. But all this is not correct. Realisation means to become all that God is, and to have all that He has, that is, to become Divinised. That is what realisation really means.”

I have heard several persons speaking on this subject, but wishing to know from Master himself what realisation really means, I requested him to explain this.

Master said, “Realisation is such a thing that if someone discovered its secret as to what it really is, then he will not want it. I am telling you one thing. When I was an abhyasi, I one day asked my Master Lalaji Maharaj, ‘Sir, you have spent a lot of time and effort on me and, from my side, I have also put in considerable effort. Is it all only for this?’

“Lalaji answered, ‘Yes, all this has been done only for this. But you seem to think little of this condition.

May I ask you a question? Suppose I were to take away this condition from you for just five minutes, how will you feel?’

“I told my Master that rather than have this happen it would be preferable for me to die! Then Lalaji answered, ‘See, realisation is such a condition which we may perhaps think of as valueless, but without it our very existence is impossible.’

“But,” added Master, “I am not prepared to reveal its secret yet. But one thing I will tell you. If realisation can be explained, it will no longer be realisation. If God can 166

The Gift of Liberation be explained or defined He ceases to be God. Both these things can’t be limited. I am giving you this hint! I will tell you one more thing. When a person has attained the state of realisation then self is gone. At that stage if you try to meditate, the self will not come to your mind at all.”

I was once eager to know how the liberation of a soul can be done, or is done by Master. Master laughed.

He said, “Is that all? Liberation is a small thing. I tell you every sincere abhyasi of this Mission will have it.

But that is only the beginning of spirituality. Liberation may give some idea of freedom for which people crave.

But what is freedom? I tell you one thing. The thieves are all put into jail and locked up. The warders who guard them are also inside the jail. But one thinks himself to be a prisoner while the other thinks he is free. Do you understand the difference? Really speaking both are in prison, but one feels free! So it is in the mind, this idea of freedom. But I tell you one thing, the warden has the idea of freedom but he is really in jail! So the real freedom is when there is freedom from freedom itself.”

I requested Master to explain whether death could be considered a liberation in itself. Some people feel that this is so.

Master replied, “Death does not solve the problems of life, but it creates intricacies for the next life. Death sends one to another state so that one may not feel the continuity of trouble. There must be some pause in between this life and the next life to come. Men are kept in dungeons. But if they are there for years in a gloomy dungeon they will require a change. So they are brought out to exercise once in a while before they go into it 167

My Master

again. Death is like that. Really speaking only fools die, and not the saints. Saints are everlasting in their own regime. So, death is of value for the other troubled persons. For the saints it is an unrevealed object. Now I tell you something very important. Life in life should be our real object.”

At one time I had written a letter to Master about this idea of freedom, saying I did not feel free at all, and requested clarification.

Master replied to me thus: “Why do you care for liberation when you yourself liberate something for the good of others? What you have asked shows that there is liberty in you but the feeling of liberty is not there. I think you want to develop a feeling of that in yourself.

That is, you want to see the eye from the eye!! Care not for what is happening! Await not for what is going to happen! In my opinion freedom is useless if it gives you the idea of freedom. Freedom and feeling cannot remain together. If freedom is there in its naked form the feeling will be away from it, and vice versa.”

Some time after this, perhaps four or five months later, I had occasion to write to Master to put before him a peculiar condition of laziness which was developing in myself. I called it laziness in my letter, but it was really a deep-seated disinclination for activity of any sort. It was blissful in a way, but I wanted Master to clarify this condition. Because it pertains to the subject of realisation, I relate this matter here.

Master wrote to me in reply, “At the point of realisation a man becomes generally lazy. He likes to live in a place where activity is not there. In such a case the person should be alert that the laziness does not become 168

The Gift of Liberation predominant and his work suffers because of it. Laziness is the life of the Soul and activity is the life of the ego. Both should be moderate.”

Some time later when I personally met Master I discussed this again. Master laughed and said, “Don’t worry about it. It is a very good condition for which much prayer is necessary even by sages. I will tell you one thing. I am very lazy myself but I do a lot of work in that condition! I tell you there is activity in inactivity, and that is the highest type of work. Only a sankalp is necessary at the beginning that such and such a thing may be done, and it is done. Even the time can be set for it, that it should be completed in so many hours or days, and it will happen exactly like that. But will must be there, a firm unfailing will. By Lalaji’s grace all this is possible.”

This ‘quiet’ or ‘rest’ of the contemplative mystic has been the wonder of the world. It is apparently contradictory that a person at rest works in a way in which the most active person cannot do so. Ruysbroeck has said, “The paradoxical quiet of the contemplative is but the outward stillness essential to inward work.

God is Eternal Rest! That which to us is action, to Him they declare, is rest.” Evelyn Underhill says, “It remains a paradox of the mystics that the passivity at which they appear to aim is really a state of the most intense activity; more, that where it is wholly absent no great creative action can take place.” One of the great mystics, Boehme, has written, “The passivity of contemplation, then, is a necessary preliminary of spiritual energy; an essential clearing of the ground. It withdraws the tide of consciousness from the shores of sense, and stops the wheel of imagination.” Meister Eckhart, another great 169

My Master

mystic, sums up the mystical view thus: “By cutting us off from the temporal plane, the lower kind of reality, contemplation gives the Eternal plane, and the powers which can communicate with that plane, their chance!”

The greatest clue to this mystery is however given by Master himself in his principle of invertendo. Simply put, anything which appears as it does at a lower level appears as its opposite in the higher manifestation.

Therefore, what appears as action at the normal level appears as inaction at the higher level! I believe this to be the clearest and simplest explanation of this cosmic law which Master has enunciated for us.

A great secret which Master teaches for our quick progress to our goal is that we should destroy our own small creation, which keeps us so tied down to it and to this world. “Destroy your own creation, and God comes!

For everything there is a base. If you destroy this base then the Divine comes.”

This great secret was revealed to me when I referred to him a somewhat vivid dream I had. I dreamt that I was seated near my Master. Suddenly two eggs, or egg-like objects, fell out of my mouth and two snakes came out of them. They were long black snakes. Master said,

“Don’t allow them to get back inside you. This is your work. In this I can do nothing.” I immediately made a strong will, transmitted, and cut the snakes into pieces and threw them away.

Interpreting this Master wrote to me, “This is a very good dream, and a revealing one. One is a real egg, and its destruction indicates that the possibility of a next life for you is now destroyed. The other egg indicates your own creation, and its destruction shows that this 170

The Gift of Liberation creation of yours, too, has been destroyed. Really it is a very good dream.” And then he concluded with that significant advice, “Destroy your own creation—God comes! For everything there is a base. If you destroy the base then the Divine comes!”

I have called liberation a ‘gift’. It is a gift of the Master. Master once told me that the moment most appropriate, or easy, for liberation is the moment of death.

He said, “At the moment of death it is very easy to liberate anybody. I just take him and put him up there.” He raised his hand, pointing from a low level to a high level, as if removing a bottle from a lower shelf and putting it on a higher shelf!! “Later on it becomes difficult. The soul must not have taken rebirth. Suppose it has taken rebirth and I liberate it, the person it has been reborn as will die! You see this difficulty! And if it has taken several rebirths then nothing can be done. So I say try for it in this life itself. Who is to say whether the Master can be free to serve you at the exact moment of your death? So try for it now.

“I tell you one thing. Heart is heart if it is diverted to God. Soul is soul if it jumps into the ultimate Reality. We have to try to reach the changeless state. When we have a goal like that then changes are necessary. Changes develop power for the Ultimate growth. There are many intelligent persons, but they don’t try to achieve that which is most important. Such people are not really intelligent. You know my definition of intelligence.

Intelligence is that which is inwardly tangible. I call him an intellectual who is inwardly talented—and when talent makes an inward search. Such a man is intelligent, really speaking!”

171

My Master

Master’s generosity is so extreme that it can be classed as nothing but divine. The Mission is full of abhyasis who, by Master’s grace, have achieved the point of liberation, and are continuing with their further development under his Divine guidance. This we can consider a guru’s service due to the abhyasi. But what about cases where Master has liberated souls on other considerations than that of abhyas under him?

Such cases reveal his extreme generosity to those who have come under his protection. But having said all this, liberation yet remains a lower order of attainment within the total scope of possibilities available under the Sahaj Marg yogic system. I quote Master once again to support this view.

“The goal of human life at its lowest is liberation, and this is thought to be all and enough. But the happier man is he who steps further into the realm of God. In my opinion liberation is a very narrow view of the Reality because we have to travel on and on to reach the Ultimate destination of man. When the charm of liberation is there we forget the next and real step, and that is a common error in human beings. It is also the fault of the Master if he does not encourage his disciples to go to the Highest, which we call laya avastha or absorption in Brahman.

“When a man gets into the central region and crosses the seven rings of splendour he enters into the stateless state. Then he goes further on. At this stage divine wisdom dawns followed, finally, by the vision of the Absolute. But the journey does not end here, because the turn of laya avastha now comes. What I have now written is the work of God. Only He can do it. Although it is the end of all our activities still there is something 172

The Gift of Liberation there. This I have referred to as ‘swimming in the Infinite’. When the laya avastha in Brahman commences there is a very fast rotation below the navel, and there control is needed. This is the work of the Master.

“Then the same rotary movement travels above and reaches, by stages, the occipital prominence. Now the progress is complete! Sometimes a little force continues in the brain, but this diminishes gradually. Now we have attained a condition which is hardly ever bestowed upon human beings. It is bestowed on him alone who is dead to the world and alive solely to God alone. In other words such a one becomes a ‘living dead.’ No amount of bhakti or tapas can bring about such a result. The only way is to attach ourselves to a Master who has got this stateless state, divorcing every other worship except that of God-Absolute in right form.”

Liberation is a mere gift, and a cheap one at that, as Master himself asserts. When we ask for this we are merely beggars, though begging for a higher thing than material benefits. The essence of Sahaj Marg teaching is that we should seek Master for himself alone, not for what he can give us. We should ask for nothing from him, we should ask him to give us himself. For such an aspirant a Master longingly waits, hoping against hope that such a one will come. As Master once told me, with near grief in his voice, “It is not as difficult to find a true Master as it is to find a true disciple. This is a very rare thing.”

Several years ago, when I was at Tirupathi for the dedication of the Mission’s ashram building constructed there, I heard a beautiful and moving story concerning sister Kasturi. On one of her early visits to Tirupathi 173

My Master

with Master, someone had offered to take her to Tirumalai and show her the famous temple to which pilgrims from all over the country flock in thousands all around the year. Sister Kasturi is reported to have smiled quietly, pointed to Master, and said, “When I am with the Creator Himself, what need is there for me to look at His creation?”

The immortal cry of that great Sufi mystic, Rabia, is very revelant here.

“O God! Whatever share of this world Thou hast allotted to me,

bestow it on Thine enemies.

and whatever share of the next world Thou hast allotted to me,

bestow it on Thy friends.

Thou art enough for me.

“O God! If I worship Thee in fear of Hell, burn me in Hell;

and if I worship Thee in hope of Paradise, exclude me from Paradise;

but if I worship Thee for Thine own sake withhold not Thine Everlasting Beauty!”

That we get God through the guru alone is the greatest single truth that Hinduism has stated again and again. The guru is God, says this profoundest of religions. We have to realise the truth of this in our lives.

I had an individual sitting with sister Kasturi towards the end of 1972, if I remember right. The sitting started off with an obstruction in my experience. I felt that there was a road-roller blocking my path. After some time I overcame this and went on. I found a huge personality 174

The Gift of Liberation seated Buddha-like right in my way. He was golden in colour, and magnificent in appearance. His face was full of an unearthly beauty, and was tinged with the golden glow of the sun. It was Lalaji, the Grand Master.

I then seemed to fall forward, and to fall right into him.

The sitting ended at this stage. I related this to sister Kasturi.

She said, “Yes, there was the initial obstruction.

I saw it like a handcart lying across your path. Your experience of Lalaji is correct. What a wonderful way ours is! Brother, a great secret has been revealed to you today. When one starts achieving laya with our Master, he is also automatically achieving laya with Lalaji. This is the most important secret revealed in this experience.”

Later I thought over this and it flashed into my mind as a revelation that this would then mean our automatically achieving laya in Brahman because the Master and Grand Master have both attained laya avastha with Brahman. This experience was given to me by Master’s Grace to prove to me, in my own conscious experience, that laya with the Master is nothing but laya with Brahman! Of God we know nothing. We know not how or where to seek Him. But the guru is one who is sent to us precisely to teach us how, through him, to find and merge with Him!

In the immortal words of St. Augustine:

“Man is what he loves.

If he loves a stone he is a stone; If he loves a man he is a man; If he loves God—I dare not say more, for if I said

that he would then be God,

ye might stone me!”

175

My Master

I close this work with a prayer by Blake, a great Western mystic.

“O Saviour! Pour upon me

Thy Spirit of meekness and love.

Annihilate the selfhood in me.

Be Thou all my Life.”

May Master give us of his own Divine Wisdom, enabling us to seek That which alone we should seek, and find Him alone whom we must find.

176

Postscript

On the evening of Wednesday the 15th of May 1974

I was taking group satsangh at the Madurai centre of our Mission. About fifteen minutes had elapsed in meditation. The whole group was silent. There was not a breath or whisper of sound. A stillness pervaded the gathering. It was a very calming and soothing stillness of total relaxation and absorption. At this moment I seemed to feel Master’s presence by me. I heard a voice, as if it was vibrating in my heart. To call it a voice is perhaps not correct. There was no sound as we hear it with our ears. It was more a vibration inside the heart which, in some non-sensible way, I heard as sound.

What Master said was this, “Many have written about the Mission. Much has also been written about the method. Now you write about the Master.”

It was a command which I hastened to obey. I commenced work two days later, on Friday the 17th of May at Munnar, feeling somewhat guilty that I had tarried two days in the process. The work was completed on Friday the 23rd August. Thus, under a direct command from my Master, this book has come into your hands.

Master has taught that we can be possessive only about three things in this universe. These are the Master,

My Master

His Mission, and His Method. Therefore the title of this book is “My Master”.

To me the carrying out of this work has been an absorbing pleasure and a revelation. I pray that it may be so to you too!

P. Rajagopalachari

1st December 1974, Madras

178
Also by Kamlesh D. Patel



Book

The Heartfulness Way: Heart-Based Meditations

for Spiritual Transformation (with Joshua Pollock)





Hay House Titles of Related Interest



YOU CAN HEAL YOUR LIFE, the movie,

starring Louise Hay & Friends

(available as a 1-DVD program, an expanded 2-DVD set,

and an online streaming video)

Watch the trailer at: www.hayhouse.com/louise-movie


THE SHIFT, the movie,

starring Dr. Wayne W. Dyer

(available as a 1-DVD program, an expanded 2-DVD set,

and on online streaming video)

Watch the trailer at: www.hayhouse.com/the-shift-movie


***


Everything Is Here to Help You:

Finding the Gift in Life’s Greatest Challenges, by Matt Kahn


The Real Life of Yogananda: The Story of the Yogi

Who Became the First Modern Guru, by Philip Goldberg


Secrets of Meditation: A Practical Guide to Inner Peace

and Personal Transformation, by davidji


Please visit:

Hay House USA: www.hayhouse.com®

Hay House Australia: www.hayhouse.com.au

Hay House UK: www.hayhouse.co.uk

Hay House India: www.hayhouse.co.in





Copyright © 2019 Sahaj Marg Spirituality Foundation

Published in the United States by: Hay House, Inc.: www.hayhouse.com®

Published in Australia by: Hay House Australia Pty. Ltd.: www.hayhouse.com.au

Published in the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK, Ltd.: www.hayhouse.co.uk

Published in India by: Hay House Publishers India: www.hayhouse.co.in

Cover design: Julie Davison

Interior design: Bryn Starr Best

Interior illustrations: © Sahaj Marg Spirituality Foundation, India


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise copied for public or private use—other than for “fair use” as brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior written permission of the publisher.

The author of this book does not dispense medical advice or prescribe the use of any technique as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems without the advice of a physician, either directly or indirectly. The intent of the author is only to offer information of a general nature to help you in your quest for emotional, physical, and spiritual well-being. In the event you use any of the information in this book for yourself, the author and the publisher assume no responsibility for your actions.

A version of Designing Destiny was previously published by Westland Publications 9789387894532.


Library of Congress Control Number: 2019943481

Hardcover ISBN: 978-1-4019-5896-1

E-book ISBN: 978-1-4019-5930-2

Audiobook ISBN: 978-1-4019-5931-9

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

1st edition, September 2019




Printed in the United States of America





You are the experiment,

you are the experimenter,

and you are the outcome.

Dedicated to all sincere experimenters.





What does destiny mean in the course of our lives?

What is fixed and how much can change?

How can we design our own destiny?





CONTENTS




Preface

Introduction: Destiny, Fate, and Free Will

PART I: PRACTICE

Chapter 1: Why Practice?

Chapter 2: Relaxation

Chapter 3: Meditation

Chapter 4: Letting Go of the Past: Cleaning

Chapter 5: Connecting with the Source: Prayer

Chapter 6: Attitude

Chapter 7: Meditation, Yoga, and Neuroscience

Chapter 8: Guidance

PART II: LIFESTYLE

Chapter 9: Transform Yourself

Chapter 10: Transform Your Relationships

PART III: DESTINY, FREE WILL, AND FREEDOM OF CHOICE

Chapter 11: Destiny

Chapter 12: The Meaning of Experiences

Chapter 13: Evolution

Chapter 14: Destiny and Vibration

Glossary

Recommended Reading

About Heartfulness

About the Author





PREFACE





I HAVE ALWAYS BEEN FASCINATED by evolution and destiny. In my own life there have been pivotal moments when life took a turn, where a decision has led me down a certain path. One of the most important turning points happened in 1976, when I was nineteen years old. One of my college friends, who would watch me meditate, asked bluntly one day, “What are you doing? Why are you wasting your time closing your eyes? I see you are always disturbed when you try to meditate.”

I said, “Well, I am trying my best, but I don’t know how.”

He said, “Let me take you to a lady who will help you to go into a trance right away.”

It appealed to me, so I said, “All right, let’s go.”

He took me to meet a very humble woman in her forties, who asked me, “Why do you want to meditate?”

I said, “It’s my natural desire. I would like to meditate. I would like to travel all over India, learning about life, like the great sages and yogis of the past. I want to become like them. I would like to realize God.”

She said, “My spiritual Guide says that God is everywhere. When He is everywhere, why not look for Him where you are?”

I continued, “I’d like to become a wandering monk and just disappear. I don’t want to marry.”

Then she said, “God is not such a fool to create two sexes if one were enough. Isn’t it a good idea that spiritually oriented people also have families and contribute to the future of humanity?”

She went on, challenging fundamental beliefs that I’d held dear. Finally, she said, “Let us not discuss this further. I will initiate you into a system of meditative practices called Heartfulness.”

Sitting for that first meditation session with this lady was the most amazing experience I had ever had in my life—it was so profound, proving to me that this system was right for me. I thought, “If a trainer of the system can transmit like this, imagine what the Guide can do!” (You will learn more about transmission in Part I of this book.)

The spiritual guide she spoke of was Ram Chandra—and now I was longing to meet him. But I had to wait. I could only visit him during my college vacation almost a year later in 1977. When I reached him in Shahjahanpur, I found him to be a loving, simple, genuine, down-to-earth person. His utter simplicity amazed me. Just looking at him made me wonder how there could be such purity in a person, such simplicity. His whole being radiated love. There was never a dull moment, even when he was silent, which he was most of the time. There was always inner communion, during which I could feel his presence. That was the beginning of my journey with Heartfulness and my Guide.





Destined to Be Daaji?


Let me ask you, the reader, a question: Suppose my destiny was always to become Daaji, the spiritual Guide of the Heartfulness movement. Does that mean my fate was completely fixed? Or could I have spoiled that in some way through making a certain choice?

That topic is the heart of what this book is about: How much of our destiny is fixed and how much can be changed? Now, I don’t want to ruin the surprises along the way! What I can say, however, is that from a very early age, I was drawn to spirituality, although I was equally comfortable in worldly life. One of the reasons I still find Heartfulness so fulfilling is that it supports us to excel in both.

I am sure, however, that my life would have never been as it is now if I had not met Ram Chandra, who is generally known as Babuji. He is the epicenter of Heartfulness and the reason I am doing what I do today. One day, the world will know the contribution he has made to humanity, quietly, in anonymity, with the true humility of a divine being. His inspiration keeps me going and nourishes my life.

He was able to distill the practices of Heartfulness from all the yogic traditions so that anyone, anywhere, from any background, any walk of life, who practices them sincerely, may evolve to the highest limit possible for human beings.

There are still a number of people from various countries who met him and spent time with him in Shahjahanpur, North India, and during his travels abroad. All of them have been deeply transformed by their experience with him, and most speak of him as “the essence of pure love.” Since his passing in 1983, the organization has continued to expand and thrive, and his simple, practical approach has continued to form the foundation of Heartfulness today.





What Is Designing Destiny?


There were two main catalysts for this book. One was a simple message that Babuji gave in his hometown of Shahjahanpur in January 1982. In it, he addresses the goal of life and our spiritual destiny. (You will discover the message in the right context later in the book. I don’t want to spoil the fun by revealing it now.)

The second catalyst for this book was a series of seminars that we at the Heartfulness Institute held for youth in 2014 and 2015. I wanted to share with my young associates the importance of living a life of purpose, excellence, and higher destiny rather than living as a reaction to all the stimuli and demands of modern society. Peer pressure is rampant; the media and advertising companies prey upon youth shamelessly in our material world. Without the guiding principle of the heart, young minds may easily succumb to the environmental pulls of our current era, without realizing that self-mastery is actually a very simple process.

In this book, I will share with you what I have learned about destiny, and how our beliefs determine the relative importance of fate and free will in our lives. I will also share with you a set of simple Heartfulness practices and lifestyle changes that can help you to design your destiny. What we do today determines our future. What we did in the past has already determined our present. This is how we weave our destiny.





INTRODUCTION





Destiny, Fate, and Free Will



THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION about destiny has always been: What is fixed and what can be changed? Are our lives governed by fate, or do we have the free will to choose our destiny? There have been endless treatises and debates over thousands of years examining the influence of karma, of astrology, of the Gods, of the fates, and of free will on our lives.

Some people believe in fate while others think that free will and freedom of choice are our birthright. Most accept a mixture of the two: there is no absolute free will and no absolute fate. Life is lived somewhere in between these two extreme views. It is like genetics. There is a fixed genetic pattern defined by the human genome, as well as a flexible epigenetic component. The basic genetic structure is fixed, but our environment, thoughts, and emotions all affect the way our genes express themselves, switching them on and off. Like destiny, genetics is both fixed and flexible. Without this, there would be no evolution!

Each one of us exists in the dimensions of time and space, and we are constantly making our mark in those dimensions by forming impressions in our energy field, creating a signature, a personality, defined by a set of cognates—an individual character or blueprint of our future karma. If we could only remove those impressions, wiping the slate clean, then the karmic blueprint would be erased, removing our limitations and expanding the possibilities of our future destiny. The good news is that those impressions can easily be removed to clear the energy field and transform our personality and karma. Throughout this book, we will discover how this is done, and understand why removing impressions can totally transform our lives.





The Principles of Destiny


There are some fundamental principles that let us approach this topic of destiny in a very practical way. The first principle of destiny is that we can only change it in the present. The past is gone and cannot be changed. It is advisable not to stay stuck in the past, as it wastes precious energy, especially as we will learn to remove the impressions left by the past so as to erase the blueprint it has left. The future is determined by the present, by how we live now. It is what we do today that matters. Every day is a golden opportunity to design the destiny of our future trajectory in every present moment.

The second principle of destiny is that we create it for ourselves by our everyday thoughts—our wishes, what attracts us and repels us, our likes and dislikes. Have you noticed that some things attract us, while others repel us, and still others do not affect us at all, as they are neutral? When we like certain things, we attract them to our own energy field. When we dislike certain things, we think that we repel them from us, but in reality they affect us just as strongly as our likes; we just bind them in a negative way instead of in a positive way.

For example, hatred can lead to thinking about a person just as strongly as love. I once had to mediate a conflict among a group of people who were very upset about their group leader—she was behaving in an oppressive way, and people were very hurt. They came to me complaining about her, and I could see that they were spending all their time thinking about her. They were meditating on her weaknesses and faults! Once they realized that is what they were doing, they changed their whole approach, and things started to go in a much better direction.

Most of the time our thoughts are busy in this activity of likes and dislikes, even though we are not aware of it: “I really like that house—I want it!” “I don’t want to work with her—she is too arrogant,” “I wish I were like him—he is so capable,” “These people look dangerous—it’s best to stay away from them,” “She is so beautiful—I want to look like her,” and so on. We constantly form impressions in our minds by letting ourselves react in the moment with our likes and dislikes.

The third and final principle about destiny we will explore in the book is that we are not alone; we are all connected. We are not only designing our own individual destiny; we are also evolving together as a species and in communities. This is known as co-evolution. This can only happen when we first evolve as individuals.

Many of us want to change the world and our collective destiny through external means, such as politics, government policies, social causes, and grassroots movements, and all of these have their place. But society is made up of individuals, and Russian author Leo Tolstoy once said, “Everyone thinks of changing the world, but no one thinks of changing himself.” To change the world, we have to change ourselves first. To design the destiny of humanity, we start with designing ourselves first and then expand our radius to include others. A day will then surely come when together we are capable of changing the direction humanity is taking.





The Importance of Training the Mind


Unfortunately, most of us have not trained our minds to escape this wandering, reactive mode. Like autumn leaves falling from the tree, blown by the wind every which way, we are going wherever we are taken, without any direction or higher focus. When the mind is like that, everyday events determine our destiny with no active planning or forethought on our part.

So what can we do? Start by training the instrument that is going to design our destiny.

Imagine that you have a beautiful new Ferrari and you are so happy driving it everywhere, across wide highways, through magnificent country, on long road trips, exactly to your heart’s desire. But you are so busy driving that you have no time to service it. So after some time, the car’s engine starts to lose performance and eventually breaks down. Soon, the car is no longer roadworthy.

But why am I discussing a Ferrari? What is the engine’s equivalent that we need to keep in good condition to design our destiny? We call it the mind, or the heart-mind, or the subtle body.

It is only once we “service” or “train” our mind that we will have an instrument capable of designing our destiny. This means regulating our thoughts to find inner stillness and clarity, clearing the clutter of constant emotions arising from the subconscious, and learning to access a deeper part of our human potential within the heart that guides us like radar does. And for this we need a meditative practice, which we will explore in depth in this book.

You may say, “I am perfectly happy as I am. Why should I change? What is wrong with my current destiny?” Of course it is your choice, and if you are happy, you may not want to change anything. But are you really perfectly happy? Think about it. If you look around you and deep into yourself, you will discover that we generally base our happiness on external objects or circumstances, so when situations change and sadness strikes, we are left without any inner tools to cope, like the Ferrari driver left stranded on the side of the road with a broken-down car. It is smart to train yourself to be happy no matter what is going on.

Think of it in another way: Is it a good idea to ignore the needs of your body until you have a chronic or terminal disease? Similarly, why wait until your mind is falling apart before looking after it? Why not keep it in excellent condition, like the Ferrari?





Shaping Our Fate: Where Is Destiny Taking Us?


The word destiny implies that we are going somewhere or toward something. If destiny is fixed, is there any need to have any personal goals in life?

But if we believe that we design our destiny, then we will set a direction with a goal. And what is it that we want in life? The most common answers given by people from all walks of life and cultures are happiness, contentment, and love. Also in some of the greatest texts, like the Ashtavakra Gita and the Bible, what did the sages of old say? Ashtavakra told Janaka to practice forgiveness, simplicity, compassion, contentment, and truth so that happiness and love can be exposed as the core. And Jesus’s teachings are also based on the same principle in the Bible.

And what brings happiness, contentment, and love? Perhaps for you, right at this moment, it is a wonderful relationship or a great career, children whose lives are fulfilled, or a comfortable lifestyle. But even if you have everything else, you know that without peace and calm you will never be happy.

When you go deeper into the subject, as we will do in this book, you will agree with me that happiness does not depend on external things or people. Things like success in our studies, a happy family life, a healthy bank balance, good friends, pleasure, possessions, and so on bring temporary joy, and that is important in day-to-day life, but they do not ensure lasting happiness. Why? They are all ephemeral; when they are gone, the happiness disappears too. And that is not a clever way to go about life—letting others determine how happy or unhappy you will be. So we need to balance this dependence on outer sources of happiness with something more enduring. To find lasting happiness, we need to look deep within ourselves. It is all about balance between the inner and the outer life.

Let’s assume for a minute that we do have a calm, balanced, and happy mind. That is already a great achievement, especially in the modern world of busyness, stress, and short attention span. But is that our destiny, just to be happy and peaceful? No. It is only a stepping-stone. It is important to know what to do with that still mind, how to use it.

We may strive for self-improvement in order to excel at whatever we do and expand our possibilities. Human beings have always done so. They have been willing to undergo struggles and discomfort to attain their goals. An Olympic gold medalist, a master violinist, and a small child learning to walk all know this. Anyone who has ever had a goal or purpose in life knows it. We struggle for something we want. Contentment is not enough. We strive to excel and improve in whatever we love.

Life is about evolution, and every life is an evolution of some sort. It may be in developing wisdom, skills, and attitudes. Inventions and discoveries are also about evolution. Even a life of failure and struggle teaches us so much and may lead to a future of growth. We can’t judge because we only know in hindsight how our failures have brought wisdom. What we do know is that this instinct to excel and push past the boundaries into the unknown is part of being human. The very fact that we ask questions like “What is the purpose of life?” shows that we have this urge. Homo sapiens means “wise man.” Even the word man comes from the Sanskrit word manas, meaning “mind.” We identify with our mind much more than our physical body.

If someone says, “What is wrong? Your face looks terrible,” you may be offended, but you will be more offended if they say, “You have lost your mind,” or “You are so stupid!” Our ego is hurt more by an insult to our mental well-being. That is also why mental illness is more of a stigma than physical disease. Diabetes is more acceptable than schizophrenia, even though both are serious health problems.

In April 2017, the World Health Organization announced that depression is now the number one cause of ill health in the world. At that time, there were over 300 million people with depression. What is the implication of this? It means a vast number of people are unhappy and wish to find a more positive, joyful purpose in life. We have reached a critical time in human history when we need to address the complexities that lead to so much depression.

If we examine our situation, we find that on the one hand we let ourselves be pulled by the desire for wealth, possession, pleasure, contentment, and success, while on the other hand we also know that lightness, joy, and love pull us toward something higher. In fact, this instinct for a higher purpose drives many of our behaviors. For example, why is love so important to us? A person in love has a spring in their step, a mother’s love is as important as good nutrition to a tiny infant, while the love between a grandparent and a grandchild is one of the most beautiful things to behold.

We search for meaning and purpose in life, for love and inner happiness, and this can be witnessed in many everyday behaviors. For example, why do we try to escape our mundane existence, whether by healthy or unhealthy means? Why do children look at the world with a sense of wonder? Why do adults still love daydreaming? All of these things are symptomatic of the search for an inner connection to a different plane of existence, the spiritual dimension, which is part of our lives as human beings. It is also very important in the bigger picture of our destiny during and beyond this life.

But how can we know how much influence can we have over our future? Is it already mapped out for us, or can we create a direction in life?





What about Free Will?


Let’s imagine that we can create our own futures. Is this possible in all aspects of our lives? We will explore this in more detail later in the book, but for now let’s just say that we have three bodies: the physical body, or sthoola sharir; the mind, or sookshma sharir; and the soul, or karana sharir, and each one requires a different approach.

Let’s take the physical body first. How much of it can we change? Some of us are short and stocky in build, while others are tall and willowy. We cannot change from one to the other, no matter what we do. We can optimize our body’s well-being by healthy eating, regular exercise, good hygiene, proper sleep, and living in tune with natural rhythms, but the possibility of changing our physical structure or genetics is limited. Next, let’s take the soul, also known as the causal body because it is the cause of our existence. There are two theories: one says that the soul is already perfect and changeless in nature, and the second says that the soul, too, has a purpose and that purpose is to evolve. Either way, the soul’s evolution is not something we can control. It happens as a result of the practices we will discuss in this book. Nurturing the soul’s existence is the way we support the causal body.

So that leaves the third body, the middle one, the mind, also known as the subtle body or the astral body, the energy field of the heart-mind. What can change here? Everything actually. We can train ourselves to regulate our thoughts, and we can work on our patterns and fears, our desires and emotional reactions. We can develop our decision-making ability, our generosity of heart, our attitude, our strength of will, and our capacity to love. These can all change drastically. This is the main body we refine in order to design our destiny.





How Do We Start, and What Are the Steps We Follow?


There are three broad steps in this process of designing destiny. First, everything starts from practice. This is the focus of Part I of the book. We need a set of practices that refine the mind so that it becomes an instrument for our growth. Such inner practices are known as meditative practices or spiritual practices. I will share with you the practices that have worked effectively for me—the Heartfulness practices. We start with practice, because change is always more effective when it starts from the inside out. Then it is lasting.

Heartfulness gives us a simple scientific approach to meditation: we are the experiment, the experimenter, and the outcome. Our heart is our laboratory. What qualifications and preparations do we need to start these practices? Interest, enthusiasm, and willingness. After purifying and simplifying the mind and heart, we are really able to expand our consciousness, realize our full human potential, and live a purposeful life.

Then, over time, practice leads to lifestyle, which is the focus of Part II. This is a natural and necessary step, because inner change is not enough; it must reflect outwardly in day-today life. What is the point of meditating if we do not become better people, kinder, more compassionate, and more giving? It will have been a waste. Ultimately, inner change and outer change cannot be separated, and our external habits and behaviors are the external expression of our inner state. So there is always a fine-tuning going on between outer behavior and inner transformation. As we grow and expand our inner potential through meditation, we need to refine our lifestyle. The two go hand in hand.

Finally, lifestyle leads to destiny, which we address in the last part of the book. This ongoing process of refining the personality through practice and lifestyle changes is known as the spiritual journey, or yatra. It is also known as the path of Yoga. By following this process, designing a destiny becomes second nature.

We create our destiny, step-by-step, bit-by-bit, through the journey of life. Every moment we make choices that lead us in a certain direction—either toward or away from our life’s purpose. But it is not a linear journey, and sometimes we go backward to move forward. We make mistakes and learn from them, and that is all part of the rich tapestry of the journey. Every thought and every action contribute.

As our lifestyle evolves, consciousness expands and becomes subtler, to the extent that our ability to design our own destiny becomes natural and effortless. Now we shall explore that path together.





CHAPTER 1



WHY PRACTICE?





HAVING BEEN A student of spirituality most of my life, I have come to the conclusion that the purpose of any spiritual practice is to expand consciousness. The meaning of that statement will become clearer as you go through this book. For now, it is enough to say that Heartfulness practices enable our available consciousness to expand and evolve from mundane consciousness to divine consciousness, from:

me to we,

selfish to selfless,

reactive to responsive,

passion to compassion,

anger to love,

arrogance to humility,

anxiety to poise,

fear to courage,

contraction to expansion,

restless to peaceful,

imbalance to balance,

heavy to light,

gross to subtle,

complex to simple,

impure to pure,

desire to contentment,

attachment to nonattachment,

expectation to acceptance,

thinking to feeling,

feeling to experiencing,

experiencing to being,

and being to nonbeing,

intellectualizing to wisdom,

having to being—in love.

These changes are achieved through very simple practices, which we will now explore.





CHAPTER 2



RELAXATION





TAKE A MINUTE to observe yourself and see if you are fully relaxed. If you observe carefully, you will probably find that some part of your body is tense or uncomfortable. It is one of the modern-day epidemics; we live in a chronic state of stress.

Why is it important to relax? There are many reasons, including to unwind physically, to calm down when we are upset, to relax tired muscles at the end of a hectic day at the office, and to free our bodies and minds so that we can meditate. We need to be able to gently close our eyes and let our inner experiences unfold when we meditate. Arriving at effortlessness, combined with a steady and comfortable posture, prepares us to plunge into meditation.

That is why the first of the four core practices of Heartfulness is Relaxation. It lets us relax all our efforts. The Heartfulness Relaxation is derived from Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras, with some improvements. When we begin, we focus first on the omnipresent energy, especially the healing energy emanating from Mother Earth. Then we imbibe that healing energy as it moves upward through our feet, allowing each organ to relax, each muscle to relax, each joint to relax. We proceed from the toes all the way up to the top of the head. And during this process, the Heartfulness trainer who gives the relaxation instructions will also connect him or herself with the Source.

When you experience this, you are touched by both the healing energy ascending from Mother Earth and the energy descending from the cosmic realms, doubly intensifying the relaxation process. You imbibe those energies, and when you then conduct similar relaxation programs you are able to create that same impact of relaxation.

You can narrate the instructions for others, or you can do them for yourself. The process is very simple and very gentle. If you are not able to remember all the steps and somehow skip one, there is no need to worry. The main idea is to relax yourself completely, to the extent of dissolving yourself and then bringing your attention ultimately to the heart, where you can intensely feel your own Center. That is the goal of relaxation.





Heartfulness Relaxation Practice


Sit comfortably and close your eyes very softly and very gently.

Let’s begin with the toes. Wiggle your toes. Now feel them relax.

Feel the healing energy of Mother Earth move up into your feet and ankles. Then up to your knees, relaxing your lower legs.

Now feel the healing energy move up your legs, relaxing them. Relax your thighs.

Now, deeply relax your hips . . . stomach . . . and waist.

Relax your back. From the top to the bottom, the entire back is relaxed.

Relax your chest . . . and shoulders. Feel your shoulders simply melting away.

Relax your upper arms. Relax each muscle in your forearms . . . your hands . . . right up to your fingertips.

Relax your neck muscles. Move your awareness up to your face. Relax your jaw . . . mouth . . . nose . . . eyes . . . earlobes . . . facial muscles . . . forehead . . . all the way to the top of your head.

Feel that your whole body is completely relaxed. Scan your system from top to toe, and if there is any part of your body that is still tense, painful, or unwell, spend some more time immersing it in the healing energy of Mother Earth.

When you are ready, move your attention to your heart. Rest there for a little while. Feel immersed in the love and light in your heart.

Remain still and quiet, and slowly become absorbed in yourself.

Remain absorbed for as long as you want, until you feel ready to come out.





Patanjali recommended relaxation as the prerequisite to his last three steps of Yoga: concentration (Dharana), meditation (Dhyana), and absorption (Samadhi). Unless your body is relaxed during meditation, your attention will keep moving from one part of your body to another as you try to make each part comfortable. If you meditate with crossed legs, your legs may become uncomfortable and your attention will then be on your physical discomfort. So in order to dissolve that, you need to relax.

When we experience relaxation, we really understand its impact, not just physically but mentally as well. It prepares us for what is to come at a spiritual level. Samadhi is our goal, which I would like to define as the ultimate spiritual relaxation.

You can practice Heartfulness Relaxation on your own every day, you can ask to be guided in the process by a trainer, or you can listen to an audio at www.heartfulness.org. Once you have learned the steps, you can easily guide others in Relaxation.





CHAPTER 3



MEDITATION





ONCE WE ARE able to relax, we can then meditate, which is the second of the Heartfulness practices. Meditation is often defined as thinking about one thing continuously, but we often get stuck with this definition and lose sight of the real purpose of meditation. Meditation reveals the true nature of the object upon which we are meditating. Such revelation comes not as a thought but as a feeling. Therefore, meditation is a process in which we shift from thinking to feeling—from thinking about the Divine to feeling the Divine Presence. It is a journey from the complexity of the mind to the simplicity of the heart. It is for this reason that many methods of meditation involve the heart.

In fact, most of us already know how to meditate. For a small child the object of meditation could be a toy for a birthday or a group of ants in the garden; for an adult it could be wealth, power, success, a loving relationship, or a higher purpose. When we focus our attention upon one thing, it is meditation. So it is the object of meditation that needs to be appropriate for the goal we want to attain, as the universal adage about meditation tells us: we become the object of our meditation, as a result of the power of our own thought.

Everything starts with thought. In Heartfulness Meditation that thought is “The source of divine light already present within my heart is drawing me inward.” But it does not end with that thought, which is just a doorway into a vast inner universe.

We are used to having so many thoughts whizzing around in our minds. We are certainly not used to thinking only about one thing, so when we start meditating we are often disappointed by the number of thoughts that appear in our mind as we sit in silence. It is natural, and in fact, it is expected that different thoughts will arise. In Heartfulness Meditation we do not repress thoughts, feelings, and emotions. Left inside, they build up like the steam inside a pressure cooker, or they lay dormant waiting for an opportunity to germinate. They are better out than in. We want them to leave, and as they leave we often become aware of their presence. When that happens, we learn to ignore them as the mind lets them go. So the idea is not to fight with them, but simply remind ourselves that we are meditating.

But even Heartfulness Meditation will become like any other type of meditation without Transmission, or pranahuti. It is difficult to describe Transmission but easy to experience its transformative effects, so it is wise to approach Heartfulness as a scientist: first meditate without Transmission, then meditate with Transmission, and compare the two experiences.





Heartfulness Meditation


Here are the steps of Heartfulness Meditation, which can be done with or without the help of pranahuti.

Sit comfortably, close your eyes softly and gently, and relax.

Turn your attention inward and gently have the thought that the source of divine light already present in your heart is attracting you from within. Do this in a gentle and natural way.

There is no need to concentrate. If you find your awareness drifting to other thoughts, gently come back to the idea of light in your heart.

Let your awareness rest in your heart. Feel yourself melting into your heart. It is all right if you relax into a deeper state beyond awareness.

Stay in meditation until you feel it is completed.





Let it be soft, as no force is needed during meditation. Meditate like this for half an hour to begin with and then, over a few days, weeks, or months, slowly increase this period up to one hour.

After completing meditation, sit for five minutes so that you can observe and savor the condition you feel within. Each time it is a unique condition, a unique gift. Hold on to it and cultivate that state. Slowly get up from your position, carrying that condition with you, as it has become a part of you.





Transmission


Transmission is the specialty of Heartfulness Meditation. Transmission removes the inner complexities or knots in our energy field so that the spiritual centers, or chakras, are cleaned and illuminated. Transmission removes the obstacles on the journey to the Source and makes meditation truly dynamic.

The Sanskrit word for Transmission is pranahuti, composed of prana and ahuti, where prana means energy or essence, and ahuti means offering or sacrifice: the prana of the transmitter is being offered, but to go on sacrificing or transmitting from a limited source will lead to depletion, so the person who is transmitting prana must be connected to the infinite Source so that they can go on transmitting. You can think of it as original, cosmic energy or divine essence flowing from the Guide into the hearts of seekers, much like a mother’s love flows naturally to her children for their growth and sustenance.

If you consider Einstein’s famous equation, E=mc2, energy is always limited by the velocity of light and the finiteness of mass, but Transmission is not bound by physical laws. The instant Transmission starts flowing, a seeker receives it wherever he or she may be. If you merely think of Transmission, it starts to flow. Even light cannot travel instantaneously. If a distance can be traversed in zero time, the velocity is infinite. Hypothetically, what would happen to Einstein’s equation if we were to substitute the speed of light with infinite, limitless velocity? Inserting infinity into the equation would mean that the energy that comes to us would also be infinite, and its source would also have to be infinite. That is Transmission.

There is another scientific principle that helps us understand the effect of Transmission, and that is entropy. Entropy is the measure of disorder in any system. In order to maintain a low level of entropy, there is the need for external input of energy into that system. Lacking such input or efforts, the system often disintegrates.

But not all energy input is stabilizing. For example, when we get angry, there is a greater flow of energy, but it destabilizes the system because it is working against us. So it is not only the energy input, but also the direction of the energy input. Compare two situations: in the first, attention is moving outward toward the periphery; in the second, attention is moving inward toward the center of the system. If our attention is drawn to the periphery, our system becomes unstable, whereas when it is drawn to the center, it stabilizes. In meditation with Transmission, our attention naturally flows inward, so our system becomes highly stable, leading to lower and lower entropy. And what is the center around which the vortex of our life exists? It is the soul.

Imagine a beautiful flower blooming in the garden. If you run past it, you will not be able to appreciate its beauty, whereas if you are walking close by, you can enjoy it more, and if you stand still in front of it, you will appreciate its beauty even more. If you are flying, then you will not even see the flower below you on the Earth. When we are moving rapidly, we miss out on many things.

The mind is faster than any physical movement. When the mind is moving rapidly from one object to another, one subject to another, one venture to another, what we miss is the blooming of the flower that is inside us. We not only miss out on the details, we miss out completely on the existence of the flower itself. That flower is our soul. Transmission pulls us so deeply into the stillness within that our attention goes to that flower. Treat it as an endangered species: How well do we look after this endangered species with love? Our undivided attention will ensure its survival, but our attention is often elsewhere outside. When we keep on moving, keep on ideating, keep on cognizing things, then we miss out on the inner beauty. What does meditation do? It centers the mind, helping it come to rest, matching the inner stillness of that sacred flower, which is steady and waiting. We try to match the inner stillness, the vibratory level of our soul, with the mind. Once this happens, something clicks. That is the moment of Realization—the absolute, perfect resonance of our outermost subtle body with the innermost sacred flower, when we are one.

Transmission conveys many meanings in various languages. For example, the first Guide of the Heartfulness tradition, Lalaji, wrote a lot about sound. He said, “Sound is the manifestation of consciousness. It is the life of lives, the soul of souls and the existence of existences. The whole world rests on it. It is the Absolute Base and the Perpetual Foundation of all creation. . . . Everywhere the vibrant currents of the movement of sound are found present in the form of Divine Light. Wherever there is movement, there is the current of sound.” If you substitute “sound” with “Transmission,” then what he says makes sense, because he is not writing about truck sounds and musical sounds, but about the subtlest vibrationless vibrations.

The Farsi word for Transmission, tavajjo, means “attention.” The full attention of the transmitter is on the receiver. So it is a state in which the transmitter is very focused, with the spiritual goal of oneness with the Source in mind. That gives us another level of understanding.

And then there is another meaning: Transmission is love.

But then let’s relate these various meanings to our spiritual journey. We are moving toward the Source, the nothingness, so how can we be one with that Source when we still have vibrations or even love? Transmission comes from the Source and touches the Source, so it must be the absolute essence of nothingness. It is indescribable.

We feel the effect of Transmission on the body in the form of relaxation, and we also feel some sort of detensioning or stillness in the mind. Emotionally we tend to become “zero”and feel balanced inside. Everything becomes quieter, and the subtle body comes to a standstill. No external sound can help us achieve this; neither can any inner sound from reciting mantras help. They all fail. It is beyond sound. It is beyond any mental makeup. No instrument can take us to that level of absolute stillness except the essence of that nothingness, Transmission.

The call of spirituality is change: “I must transform myself from whatever I am today to what I ought to be.” What is it that is preventing me? The heaviness created by my samskaras, my impressions. How does Transmission help us to be free of the shackles of these impressions that we have been carrying from one life to another life? They are not something with physical attributes that can be removed. They are like wrinkles in clothes that have to be smoothened by ironing; the samskaras that create ripples in the mind have to be removed and somehow Transmission irons them out. We could describe the process as “magical,” because it is something that cannot be expressed in words. Transmission goes to the very root of the samskara and removes it. At times, it allows it to dissolve or evaporate so as to bring the vibrations of impressions to zero.

There is a reference to the word pranahuti in the Kena Upanishad, where it is described as pranasya pranah, meaning “life of life.” In short, it is the life-giving force. But we already have a life force within us, the soul. So the question arises, “Is the soul not self-sufficient in making our life?” Here is an analogy: during the hot summer months, especially in India, the leaves wilt on the trees. They sometimes appear as if they are going to die. The life drains from them, although the roots underground keep on absorbing moisture and nutrients to the extent possible. But with the first rains of the monsoon, the trees come to life. New life begins, there is freshness, and there is so much joy all around.

In the same way, we exist because of the soul that is within us, but the moment we receive the first Transmission, we absorb nourishment for the soul, life changes, and there is freshness in our existence. It is then up to us to make use of it in the best way, and that is where we all differ. If we continue the analogy of the monsoon, rain falls on fertile soil, on poor desert soil, and on rock, and each environment will respond differently to its life-giving potential. Likewise, each one of us responds to pranahuti according to our nature. When we are very receptive, when there is humility, when there is an emotional vacuum within, it pours in. We receive it, and it flows all throughout our system. Not only do we receive it, we are also able to unconsciously share it with others as the heart is saturated with its essence. Having received the Transmission, we can now distribute it.

There is no Heartfulness session without Transmission, and its purpose is multifold. Imagine a person who cannot walk. They need a cane, or crutches or a wheelchair. Similarly, when a person is unable to regulate their mind or traverse the various layers of consciousness, it is Transmission that prepares the way into superconsciousness—the vast expanse of the consciousness spectrum that is above the narrow sphere of consciousness. They cannot move even a millimeter in consciousness through self-effort. Transmission acts like a cane or crutch to support consciousness to expand into another dimension. It helps us transcend from one level to another level, to soar higher into superconsciousness and dive deeper, cleaning the subconscious depths of the mind. That is its primary role.

We receive the essence of Transmission in the first meditation session so that the Source can work its magic. When we compare meditation without Transmission to Heartfulness Meditation with Transmission and feel the difference, we are recognizing that shift in consciousness created by Transmission.

We will explore the role of the Guide in making Transmission possible in the chapter on Guidance.

There are various ways to experience meditation with Transmission: by joining our masterclass series online at heartfulness.org/masterclass, visiting your local Heartfulness Center, calling to request an appointment, requesting a session on the HeartsApp application on your smartphone, requesting a session at www.heartfulness.org, or emailing us at info@heartfulness.org.





Going Deeper


When we are comfortable with the basics of meditation, we start to dive deeper, feeling the Transmission flowing and witnessing what is happening inside. It helps to be alert and conscious, and adjust ourselves to the process.

In the beginning we reach a certain depth and get used to that depth. But after some time, we feel stuck, as if we can’t go deeper, as if there is some threshold that can’t be crossed. What can we do when this happens? Sometimes we don’t feel like meditating; we feel restless and distracted. The trick is to keep going. Soon you will find that the condition changes and you can go deeper again, especially if you have meditation sessions with a trainer capable of imparting Transmission.

Over time, we discover that consciousness has a moving threshold. Can we compare the depth from one year ago to today? When we go beyond a certain threshold, suddenly we are in a new territory or environment. So initially we cannot observe or connect with the new level of consciousness. That is why we lose awareness when we go deep during meditation.

The depth that we feel during meditation as a newcomer and the depth we feel as an adept are different. A small child may have to be held even in one foot of water, but those who know how to swim can survive in an ocean 50 km deep. As we continue to meditate, we gradually get used to different levels of consciousness, because at each step we have journeyed to a new depth. Superficially, it may seem like there is no difference between one state of absorption and another, because we lose awareness each time, but if we look at the condition after meditation, the lightness we felt back then and the lightness we feel today are different. Consciousness is an ever-expanding canvas.

To meditate well, you must have a well-rested mind and heart. Physical rest is a must. A sleepy mind and lethargic body will not take you anywhere. If you are too sleepy to meditate well when you wake up, go for a jog or walk or swim, and then meditate afterward.

To build muscles we may make great plans to go to the gym every day. Some of us go for a couple of days and then lose interest, because it is hard work and the body feels sore. Others are serious, going through vigorous training for three months, six months, or three years, and see the results. It becomes obvious as the muscles strengthen over time. Meditation is also like that, but while the changes we go through because of meditation are invisible changes, we still feel them.





What to Do with Thoughts?


This is a constant problem we all face—the tornado of thoughts arising in our minds all the time. This passage from my first Guide, Babuji, comes from his book Reality at Dawn, and gives us some clear guidance on how to work with this problem:

Generally people complain of numerous ideas creeping into their mind at the time of meditation. They think that they have failed in their practice unless they bring their mind to a standstill. But it is not so. We are not practicing concentration, but only meditation. We must go on with meditation unmindful of the foreign ideas that happen to come to our mind at the time. The flow of ideas is due to the activities of our conscious mind, which is never at rest. We are still busy in meditation with our subconscious mind, while our conscious mind is roaming about and forming numerous ideas. Thus we are not the loser in any way. In due course, after sufficient practice, the conscious mind too gets molded and begins to act in harmony with the subconscious mind. The result thus achieved is deep-rooted and lasting, and finally calmness, the characteristic of the soul, becomes predominant.



There is also a second piece of guidance for managing thoughts. We all want to bring our minds to a still, thoughtless condition during meditation, but what are we doing with our minds the other twenty-three hours of the day? Observe yourself and see. How can it possibly be still for one hour when the rest of the time it is wandering all over the place?





Retain the Meditative State


One way to regulate your mind throughout the day is to remain in a meditative state, carrying the condition you experienced during meditation with you. You can also make the following suggestion wherever you go:

Think that everything around you is absorbed in Godly remembrance. Start by first feeling absorbed in Godly remembrance yourself so its echo will be felt outside.



In this practice, you are allowing the innermost essence of yourself, the Center, to resonate with the innermost essence in everything else—the trees, the birds, the cars, the air particles, etc.—so that everything is absorbed in that essence.

A time will come when you notice that you don’t have thoughts at all. The mind is in stillness. Slowly, little by little, it is becoming fine-tuned. This practice of feeling Godly remembrance absorbed even in outer objects keeps your mind focused. It is an amazing benefit, like Yoda says in Star Wars: “Luminous beings are we, not this crude matter. You must feel the Force around you. Here, between you, me, the tree, the rock, everywhere. Yes, even between this land and that ship.” And there is another benefit: whether you are at the theater or in a shopping mall or college, can you imagine what happens to the feeling around you when you offer this suggestion? Try it as an experiment.

Make this suggestion when you have nothing else to do. You will become absorbed in Godly remembrance, and slowly this absorbency will expand, not just to your immediate surroundings but also to a friend you think of who is living somewhere else. You will send vibrations all over. Allow this feeling to expand. There are no limits to this expansion except those imposed by you. The Earth will be too small; even the Universe will be too small when you allow your consciousness to expand—a consciousness packed with love.

Meditation is also an ever-expanding practice. If you are doing a little today, do a little bit more tomorrow. Try to meditate daily. Then, after you have mastered this, fix your timing to meditate at the same time every day. A time will come when your meditative state will have an echo in others; you will create an impact on them.

Once you can regulate your mind during meditation, the next step is to regulate your mind the rest of the time. Thoughts are rising all the time, but during meditation you become fully aware of what is happening inside, and that is why they speak so loudly.

When you have a session with a trainer, sometimes thoughts arise even more intensely than at other times. When they are good thoughts, you often enjoy them and they seem to expand further and further. But when the thoughts are not so good, when difficult thoughts surface, you may wonder why such thoughts are coming now, and struggle inside. It helps to remember that all these thoughts, good or bad, are only rising from your subconscious to be removed. Very rarely will you be able to recollect the actual thoughts afterward, because they come from the unknown and they go to the unknown. So let them go. Just gently remind yourself that you are meditating.

How do such thoughts get into our subconscious minds in the first place, and how do they make the subconscious their home? This will be easier to understand when we explore the accumulation of impressions and their cleaning in the next chapter.





Observation


I have always found it very useful to spend a few minutes scanning my system after meditation, to observe how I feel and what has happened inside. Then I write these observations in a journal. I notice different things happening all the time, and sometimes nothing seems to be happening. That is also okay. For example, I may write, “Experienced nothing today,” or “My mind was too busy with thoughts to meditate properly.” Simply write whatever happens, as a scientist would, and you will also start to notice cycles in your interest in the practice, in your ability to observe within, in your sensitivity to describe different states, and in your moods. You will notice different types of experiences.

Here is a personal example. I was very surprised by an entry I made quite a few years back. At that time, a particular experience seemed very trivial to me. I had written that I saw a particular person during my meditation and we became one. Yesterday, by accident, I opened my diary to that page. It hit me like a rocket. I started crying afterward. It made such an impact, but at the time I wrote it, it meant nothing.

Here is another one. In 1979, when I was still living in India, I had a dream, and in my journal I wrote a description of the place I saw in the dream. It had a stream, giant trees of one hundred and fifty feet, a big canopy, a large lawn, and a small house. In the dream I was seated beside my second Guide, Chariji, and there were four or five others with us. I was even marveling in the dream, “This is a foreign land, and I am in India.” Later, in 1986, we were in Atlanta, and Chariji said, “Let’s go to Albany.” So five or six of us went to Albany in New York State, and the place we visited was the place I had seen in my dream and described in my journal. I had dreamed about the exact location.

So even if something seems mundane, write it in your journal, for example, “I saw a squirrel.” Maybe you will interact with her later on! Write down what you feel in meditation, and you can also write your dreams, the thoughts you have, the feelings you have toward yourself, toward family members, toward others, toward your Guide, toward God, the books that you read, the movies that you see . . . there are so many things.

Now, how do we observe and “read” these inner states, which are also known as conditions? The first step is to create a condition and then let it speak to us. Writing our experiences in a journal cultivates this ability, which is also the first step in retaining that condition.

Reading the inner condition is a relative thing. Imagine trying to read a foreign language that you don’t know: for example, Chinese, Tamil, and Greek all look like Martian to me, as I am not used to the letters. At times I do not even know which language is written on paper, but it is enough to know that there is something written. So begin like that. Start with, “Something is written.” Then start identifying the letters, then the words, then the sentences, and the subtle nuances. They come automatically when you begin somewhere.

To help with this, before meditating, scan your entire system from top to bottom and observe. Then, slowly, go into meditation. At the end, see if there is any difference between your condition before the meditation and afterward. Then hold on to that difference in your mind.

You may not be able to give a name to it—like the state of Nirvana or the state of detachment or the state of sat-chit-anand—but during the day, recall the way it felt. And if it is impressive, then even after one week you will remember, “Last Friday’s meditation was special; it was so beautiful.” So first get used to the experiences and observe them. What happens later on? It is like giving somebody a mango when he doesn’t know its name. Knowing the name is important only when he wants to ask for it to eat it again. But he will say, “I remember that fruit. It was so nice,” even if he has forgotten the name. When you have experiences, recollect and recapture them now and then.

There are certain experiences of previous meditation sessions I am unable to forget even today, because they were so impressive and mesmerizing. Was the meditation so important? No, it was the condition that changed me, that lifted me, that still haunts me. When you witness the difference in your state of mind and heart after such a meditation, then you will be able to hold on to it. It doesn’t matter what you call it.





Create a Meditative State


In every meditation there is something unique that is bestowed upon us. This is how we receive spiritual nourishment or earn spiritual wealth. How do we then preserve the new condition that has been gifted to us?

The first step is to become sensitive enough to know that we are being given spiritual nourishment, and then to make efforts to retain it, preserve it, and let it grow. I call it: acquire, enliven, imbibe, become one with it, and eventually reach a state of union, or AEIOU. We secure it so that it becomes one with us. We merge with it. AEIOU is easy to remember.

It requires only five minutes after meditation to observe ourselves within, to try to recognize and become one with our condition, savor it, enliven it, and make it ours. Then it has a chance to grow. When we sharpen a knife, we do so to cut vegetables. When we sharpen our consciousness, it is to be used during the daytime. It helps to know how sharp our consciousness is. During morning Meditation, we achieve a certain level of consciousness. When we hold on to it and carry on with our day-to-day activities, we retain a full grip over the morning condition with open eyes.

What does “grip over the condition” mean? Here is an analogy: suppose someone tells you a joke, and later on at home you remember the joke and it makes you laugh aloud. Your son asks, “Daddy, what’s up?” So you explain, “I remembered a joke.” In the same way, the condition arising out of morning Meditation may be so good, so profound, and so intense that it comes back to you. You learn to walk with it, work with it, relax with it, and imbibe it fully. That is the meditative state we try to carry with us day and night.

Once serenity and purity are created within through meditation, we learn how to hold on to them. This is the art known as “meditation with open eyes” or “constant remembrance,” in which we carry the condition received during meditation throughout the day into all aspects of our life.

To achieve this, those five or six minutes after meditation are so productive. Use them wisely to your advantage. The inner meditative condition is subtler than the fragrance of a rose. It can easily dissipate into thin air so that we cannot recall it. So there are a few things to avoid immediately after meditation in order to retain the condition that has been given to us:

Try not to draw your attention outward straight after meditation. This means not changing things in the outer environment. If the fan is on, let it be on. If the fan is not on, don’t turn it on, because it will draw your attention outward. Similarly, avoid drinking water immediately after meditation. When someone is crying or you have to give bad news to someone, you go with a glass of water so that the person quiets down, because it redirects their attention from inward to outward. In that situation, by giving water you are changing the condition for the better. After we meditate, the condition can be lost by drinking water for the same reason—it redirects our attention outward.

Take the example of freshly laid concrete; it is better not to walk on it until it has settled properly. If we walk on it, allow dogs to run over it, and let someone write, “I love Monica” on it, then that concrete is spoiled forever. Like concrete, our inner condition also has to settle in our heart, and it needs attention. Observe how it settles inside you, feel how it drenches your system, and then, when you are confident that you can observe and hold on to it even with your open eyes, confidently get up and carry on with your day.

The condition you receive in meditation is much finer and subtler than concrete. Mere carelessness can make it disappear. So be tender and careful with it. Spend five minutes to savor it, absorb it, and then get up with the resolution that you are getting all the help you need to nurture it and let it grow. The guidance will come from inside you. Have the willingness, interest, and intention to preserve it and let it grow.

Try to remain in that meditative state with your open eyes. Center yourself in your heart, be perceptive, and try to understand things with your heart. When you observe things around you, keep your attention in the heart. Let your inner radar open up. If you want to become very discerning, this is the habit to cultivate!

A mind that is not balanced loses its radar, its direction. A pure mind finds its direction within because it is centered. A settled mind finds its own center. So, meditation ultimately brings you to your center and makes it palpable. You then have inner guidance all the time, and it speaks to you, especially about wrong things. About truth it may not speak at all, because truth is its nature.

The very first step or attainment in spirituality is discernment. Without the ability to discriminate between right and wrong, good and bad, honorable and disreputable, your inner radar is lost. When you have a pure heart, that inner radar is very powerful. With a pure heart, you can know so many things.

As the meditative state deepens into constant remembrance, the whole spectrum of consciousness remains in contact with your Center, as the substratum of your existence, and over time this underlying connection blossoms into love. Just as we always remember those we love, the reverse also holds true: the more we remember, the more love develops.

If you have to define Heartfulness, it is love. It is a love story between our “self ” and our Creator. In the beginning we do not know what the Creator or God is, and it is difficult to fall in love with something we don’t know. So we start with our focus on our side of the relationship, on “I,” looking inward. Then the Guide comes to our aid. The Guide is experienced and comfortable in this realm of God, so he gently shifts our attention away from “I” toward “we.” This “I” and “we” dynamic evolves and expands over time through many levels of consciousness. He is also someone with whom we can identify on the human level as we go through these levels of consciousness. The more he helps us, through his Transmission and his support, the more we appropriate his help and the more gratitude we feel toward him, as our attention moves from the gifts to the giver. This gratitude leads us to remember him more often, and after some time love also dawns. At some point we feel so much love, and we don’t know how it has happened.

This all starts with the simple act of meditation. Meditation is the mother of constant remembrance. Without a mother there is no child; without mother-meditation there is no constant remembrance.

This ability to remain in the meditative state all throughout the day while still doing other things is another process that we all understand very well—it is not something difficult. Think about a child learning to ride a bicycle. When you first teach your child, you bring home a tricycle and help her by holding on to it while she learns to pedal it properly. From a tricycle, you then bring her a two-wheeler bicycle with two trainer wheels at the back. After some practice, you remove the trainer wheels and she is on two wheels. Then what happens? She goes to kindergarten or to school on a bigger bicycle. She rides with her friends, chatting away, singing, and watching the traffic, remembering where she is going. She observes things while still riding her bicycle. It is easy for a child and does not take long.

If a child can master the art of cycling while doing other things, we can also master the art of pedaling the spiritual condition. Of course we will forget now and then, but if we are really interested, then we will start pedaling each condition after meditation, and we will learn how to do other things while maintaining the meditative state. If we learn how to pedal our condition during the daytime, we can be doing so many things at the same time. That is constant remembrance—it is simple.





Be Like a Lotus


In certain environments it is more difficult to maintain that inner condition. For example, students complain about this in their college accommodation, but anything can be detrimental if you allow it to be. I also lived in a hostel from the ninth grade until I did my master’s degree, and I learned that you can turn the adverse situation to your advantage.

If some of your friends make fun of you for meditating, challenge them by saying, “Look, I assure you this will do you a lot of good.” Ask your friends, “Do you want to change? This will help you to change.” When I was at colleg,e one of my friends couldn’t sleep, and when he did sleep it was at the wrong time. So we enticed him, “Come and meditate, and your sleep pattern will improve.” In the very first meditation session his sleep pattern was normalized. Another fellow did not know how to study well. His focus was so poor that our professors said, “Go with Kamlesh. He will take you for meditation. It will improve.” At one time we had more than twenty-five students meditating, so a trainer would give us meditation sessions in our hostel. It really depends on what we make of any situation. Simplicity is not a weakness. Purity is not a weakness. They are mighty if we allow them to be.

As we nurture the subtle conditions bestowed during meditation, over time they create a beautiful environment. Imagine what sort of environment can be created at home when we meditate; our family members meditate, and our friends also come home and meditate. There will be so much lightness, peace, and joy. Everyone will feel happy in that space.

An atmosphere that is created by our collective thoughts and feelings is called an egregore. When we all meditate together, we create a subtle field of loving unity. And when enough people meditate, a particular tipping point in the egregore will be reached. Then the course of humanity will change.





CHAPTER 4



LETTING GO OF THE PAST: CLEANING





ONE OF THE problems we all face while meditating is the distraction caused by our own thoughts and feelings. We need something to clear our field of consciousness, creating stillness in the mind. In Heartfulness we have a practice of mental detoxification called Cleaning. It helps us to dive deeper into meditation, removing the impurities, complexities, and emotional heaviness that accumulate during the day in our minds. We feel lighter and more carefree. These complexities and impurities accumulate as a result of repeated patterns of feeling, emotion, and thought, which, in turn, lead to repetitive actions. These actions become habits that impress upon our minds, creating fixed patterns of behavior that become more and more fixed over time, forming impressions in our subtle body.

As the English proverb says:

Sow a thought and reap an action,

Sow an action and reap a habit,

Sow a habit and reap a character,

Sow a character and reap a destiny.





How Do We Form Impressions?


Imagine for a minute that you are walking in a garden and you notice the exquisite fragrance of a rose in the air. The next day when you walk past the same place, you become more aware of the beautiful fragrance, and you look for the rose bush. You find it, go closer, and observe how beautiful it is. After enjoying both the fragrance and its visual beauty, you walk on. On the third day you hold the flower, and on the fourth day you pluck it and take it home. That is how we form impressions. We are not happy with one inhalation of fragrance. We want to own it, we want to possess it, and then we are caught!

There is a story about a saint who was peacefully meditating in a jungle. He had no problems. He was blissful and well respected by the villagers nearby. He had only a loincloth to worry about, which he would wash and hang on a tree branch at night. But some little mice started eating it while it hung on the branch, and his loincloth was slowly becoming smaller and smaller.

So the villagers suggested, “Let’s get you a cat.”

They got him a cat to chase away the mice, but to keep a cat you have to give it milk all the time. So somebody started bringing milk every evening to feed the cat until they got tired of it.

They said, “How can we come every evening and risk our lives returning back to the village?”

So they decided to get him a cow. Now somebody needed to milk the cow that fed the cat that caught the mice that ate the loincloth. They sent a maid to milk the cow. He fell in love with that maid and started a family. One little desire triggered this chain reaction!

It doesn’t matter if a wish is fulfilled or not or whether it is attainable or not; as long as it is a seed in your mind, it will wait for an opportunity to germinate. It may stay buried for ten lifetimes. As a small boy, you may have really wanted a certain little remote-controlled car, and now as an adult that impression still haunts you: “I have to buy that sort of car!” Until you get it, you are miserable. And the biggest problem is that generally we are not even conscious of such wishes.

Swami Vivekananda describes this process of formation of impressions and the resulting cognates we develop in his book, Jnana Yoga: “Suppose I go into the street and see a dog. How do I know it is a dog? I refer it to my mind, and in my mind are groups of all my past experiences, arranged and pigeon-holed, as it were. As soon as a new impression comes, I take it up and refer it to some of the old pigeon-holes, and as soon as I find a group of the same impressions already existing, I place it in that group, and I am satisfied. I know it is a dog, because it coincides with the impressions already there.

“When I do not find the cognates of this new experience inside, I become dissatisfied. When, not finding the cognates of an impression, we become dissatisfied, this state of the mind is called ‘ignorance’; but, when, finding the cognates of an impression already existing, we become satisfied, this is called ‘knowledge.’ When one apple fell, men became dissatisfied. Then gradually they found out the group. What was the group they found? That all apples fall, so they called it ‘gravitation.’ Now we see that without a fund of already existing experience, any new experience would be impossible, for there would be nothing to which to refer the new impression.”1

Any thought or action can lead to an impression, and when the thoughts or actions repeat themselves, they lead to habits, creating rigid thought patterns, which become more and more solid over time.

Imagine that your mind is completely pure and still, like a crystal-clear pool of water in utter stillness, in which you can see all the way to the bottom. Now, a thought, an emotion, or an experience enters that field, and creates ripples and turbulence, just as a disturbance does in water. If that disturbance is not removed, it creates a knot of energy, an impression. As the impression deepens and hardens, it becomes fixed into a samskara. Samskaras are the base of our habits, our fears, and our desires, which then are repeated over and over again, just as a trickle of water forms a stream then eventually a river as water follows the same path.

Unless we remove samskaras, we stay trapped in our patterns and we cannot break free, no matter how much we may want to change.

We are not able to change the past, but we can remove the samskaras that have formed as a result of our past. If today’s existence is about working off these older samskaras, how is tomorrow’s existence formed? We can clean all our previous samskaras in this life, but are we going to continue to form more? This topic is one of the most important aspects of how we design our future destiny.

There is also another way we form impressions, and that is by watching TV, movies, and video games. We become affected when we watch a violent scene or a romantic scene. The drama may not be from our own lives, but after watching the program we absorb those impressions, and before going to sleep the same reel goes on in our minds. What happens to our heart at that time? Does it remain placid and unaffected? Often it is affected just as it would be in real life. Can we remain immune to such impressions?

There is no need to stop watching TV or movies, but we do need to sensitize ourselves to forming such impressions and, whenever possible, vaccinate ourselves against them. The only vaccination I know is to remain absorbed in the deepest level of our consciousness by connecting with our highest Self within. Then we remain like a lotus in the water, unaffected by the mud all around us. Otherwise we remain vulnerable.

There is another aspect to this modern pastime of TV and the Internet. What are they all about? They remind us of our incompleteness. They remind us that, “Your husband is not like this,” or “Your children should be like this.” They remind us that we do not have a house like this, we want a car like this, we do not have friends like this, we should eat food like this, and we must visit this or that holiday destination. We sit there filling our minds with expectations and dreams, with fantasies, fairy tales, and excitement that are not in our own lives. We will always feel that dissatisfied sense of “If only my life was like that!”





Types of Impressions


What types of impressions dominate our lives? There can be so many types, for example, worldly worries, sexual attraction to other people and problems in relationships, prejudices, greed, grief, sadness, self-pity, guilt, and shame. But as well as impressions formed by our thoughts and actions, we also form impressions by our inactions, creating more guilt. These are the things that we should do but don’t do, and such things haunt us all our lives. For example, we may have hurt someone very dear to us without ever having said sorry. Impressions like that are difficult to remove.

Also, as well as forming our own impressions, what about those times when we become the instrument of forming impressions in the lives of others? For example, a simple throwaway criticism can hurt another person so deeply that they are disturbed for days. A flirtatious glance from a pretty girl can leave a young man gaga for weeks. And if we go on polluting this beautiful planet with our careless lifestyles, definitely there will be a consequence to our actions.

Another way to look at all of this is that the formation of samskaras happens when we deviate from the principle of leading a life with love. We become unnatural, and such an unnatural life means that we form samskaras.

There is a funny story about this: Once upon a time, a Japanese master welcomed a university professor who came to inquire about Zen. The master served tea, and when he poured the tea into the professor’s cup, he kept on pouring after it had overflowed.

The professor watched this for some time, until he could no longer keep quiet: “It is overflowing. Please stop.”

“Like this cup, you are full of your own opinions and beliefs,” said the Zen master. “How can I teach you unless you first empty your cup?”





Heartfulness Cleaning


We do the practice of Heartfulness Cleaning at the end of the working day, ideally before sunset, refreshing ourselves and creating a vacuum within, purifying our system of its accumulated heaviness. Although it is simple, there are a number of steps to Cleaning, so in the beginning it is better to practice them in sequence, as follows:

Sit in a comfortable position with the intention to remove all the impressions accumulated during the day.

Close your eyes and feel relaxed.

Imagine all the complexities and impurities are leaving your entire system.

They are going out from your back, from the top of your head to your tailbone.

Feel they are leaving your system as smoke.

Remain alert during the entire process, like a witness to the clouds passing in the sky.

Gently accelerate this process with confidence and determination, applying your will as needed.

If your attention drifts and events of the day begin to come to mind, gently bring your focus back to the cleaning.

As the impressions are leaving from your back, you will start to feel light in your heart.

Continue this process for 20 to 25 minutes.

When you experience inner lightness, you will naturally find it easy to connect with the Source. Feel a current of purity coming from the Source and entering your system from the front.

This current is flowing throughout your system, carrying away any remaining complexities and impurities.

You have now returned to a simpler, purer, and more balanced state. Every cell of your body is emanating simplicity, lightness, and purity.





After some practice, just like pedaling a bicycle, you will no longer need to suggest all of these individual steps to yourself. The moment you close your eyes, they will start happening on their own and you will not need words.

But even when you do the Cleaning regularly, as prescribed, you may still wonder, “Have I done it correctly?” How can you judge that you have completed the Cleaning the way it should be done? Here is one way: do a comparative study when you go to a trainer. After a meditation session with a trainer, study your condition and see how it is. Do you have a similar lightness after you do your own Cleaning at home? If the answer is yes, then you have done a good job with the Cleaning process. Otherwise, keep going.





What Is Being Cleaned


When we clean in the evening, we unload the impressions that we collect during the day and create a vacuum in the heart. The practice of Cleaning removes the impressions that accumulate in our subtle body, in the same way that we take a bath to clean away the dirt from the physical body.

What is being purified? It is our consciousness, and this then has a ripple effect on our whole worldview, bringing clarity, understanding, and wisdom. A pure consciousness is able to easily discern and make wise choices. In fact, Lalaji once said, “The soul of a human being will be clean in proportion to the power of discrimination they possess.” The purer the heart, the more wisdom we will have. When this protective wisdom is gone, we become vulnerable. This is very practical guidance for anyone who wishes to live a life full of wisdom. It also highlights the importance of the Cleaning practice.





When to Do Cleaning


Generally we practice Cleaning at the end of the day, but what if something happens during the day that affects us despite our best efforts to remain calm? Do we wait until evening to remove the effect on our system? When your hands get dirty during the day, do you wait until the evening bath to wash them? If you accidentally spill food on your shirt while having lunch, do you leave the stain there till evening? No. You spot clean your shirt with water and soap immediately to minimize the staining.

Similarly, if you have an argument, or something happens that disturbs you, remove it then and there. Make a subtle suggestion: “What has affected me right now is going from the back in the form of smoke.” After a few minutes, when you are confident that the impression has gone, make a firm resolution that it has really gone. Perhaps it is not possible to close your eyes, because you are in class or in a meeting, but you can still clean for a few minutes.

So Cleaning changes everything! As samskaras are removed, the past loses its hold over us. The trajectory of our karmic destiny is no longer fixed, and we have the opportunity to mold our lives into what they ought to be.





How to Avoid Forming Impressions


Cleaning removes the impressions that have already formed in our system, but how do we stop them from forming in the first place? Some simple attitudes and behaviors will help. For example, if you are having an argument, and you know it is not leading anywhere and will disturb your consciousness for the rest of the day, then stop arguing and simply say, “I am sorry.” Take a step back during the process and pause. You have a choice. Prevention is a wise option.

Imagine you have a bad day at the office and come home with a lot of tension and frustration. Your poor wife has also had a hectic day and is trying to cook dinner for the kids, who are tired and hungry. What happens? Do you pamper each other? Very often, in such circumstances, you argue. So, instead, when you know your day has been stressful, first cool down. As soon as you enter the house, wash your face and sit for Cleaning. Afterward you will have a fresh consciousness, a renewed consciousness, and then you will not trigger any conflict with your family or friends. You can say that your consciousness is protective, as you won’t argue and you will prevent a lot of impressions from gathering and spoiling your consciousness.

Such a lifestyle is so much better than reacting to every little thing. But this is also not the ultimate, ideal lifestyle, because it is still defensive. The ideal life is carefree, because we do not form impressions. That is self-mastery, the life of a Master or Guide. Instead of forming impressions, they help others to stop forming impressions. We are aiming at such a lifestyle where nothing touches us. How is that possible when we have to live in the world? Remember the meditative state? Our consciousness is a twenty-four-hour business. By evolving and expanding our consciousness, after some time we do not even think of it as protective, because it is our existence itself. It is not something we have to invoke, because we are that.

The more we retain the meditative state after morning Meditation, the easier it is to live a life in which we don’t form impressions. And we already know the method to do this: meditating with eyes open. In this state we are drowned in love, resting in absolute osmosis with the Guide, and going about all our other activities in this state. This demands a conscious lifestyle.





Emotional Reactions


We can remove impressions by Heartfulness Cleaning, but what about all the behavioral patterns and habits that define us as individuals? Do they also disappear automatically when we clean the impressions, or do we need to do something more about them?

Those patterns often lead to emotional reactions and traits that are habitual. Take the story of Mulla Nasruddin, who complained every day at lunchtime that he was tired of having the same salad sandwiches for lunch. His colleagues listened to these complaints over and over for a few weeks and then suggested a solution.

“Dear Mulla, how about telling your wife to make something different? Encourage her to be more creative.”

“Oh, I am not married,” replied the Mulla.

“Then who makes your lunch for you?”

“I do,” replied the Mulla.

What are our “salad sandwich” patterns? And what are we doing to change them?

We can liken impressions and behavioral tendencies to water flowing in a river. Imagine that samskaras are like the water in the river; the water can be removed, just as we remove the samskaras, but what happens when it rains again? If the riverbed is there, the water will start flowing again in the same old pattern. The riverbed is the field of our habits, so we re-create the same samskaras because we do not let go of the behavioral patterns. The only solution is to remove the riverbed.

How do we do that? Personally I have learned to cultivate a carefree attitude, which leads to a state of acceptance. Not only is it possible, it is easier than you might imagine. The simple formula is: meditate, retain, and grow. One step takes you to the next. Take one step at a time. Practice first, and everything else will follow. Sometimes it is difficult, because we do not know what will follow. It is like driving on a foggy road at night in the mountains when you can’t see anything. You drive slowly, and the way becomes clearer as you continue. If you stop driving, you won’t reach anywhere. The spiritual journey is also like that. We need to walk with faith in our own abilities, our own belief, and our own trust and confidence. Invoke that. When we do our part well, the Guide is able to do his so much better.

Think of the most beautiful music. Now imagine if the instruments playing it were not kept clean. Would that beautiful sound emerge? Imagine a flute so clogged up with dust and saliva that the sound emerging from it is distorted. Imagine a guitar with rusty strings. The heart, like the flute and the guitar, produces beautiful music when it is not so caught up with the complexities of life. As we become simpler and purer with Cleaning, the heart becomes ready to receive the ultimate bounties. In such a heart, heaven descends.





CHAPTER 5



CONNECTING WITH THE SOURCE: PRAYER





SO FAR WE have explored Relaxation, Meditation, and Cleaning. The next Heartfulness practice is Prayer. Most people associate prayer with religion, as a way to entreat God: a plea, an earnest hope, or wish for something more than we are or have, for something to fill us. It is designed to take us from our current state to our desired state.

We pray for things we feel are lacking. Often we pray in times of difficulty, and we pray for help, for hope, and for salvation. We pray for the well-being of our loved ones, we pray to be forgiven for things we have done, we pray to change our character and attitudes, and we pray for happiness, more money, a better job, or healthy children. We hope that God will fix our suffering and our problems so that our lives and the lives of others become better. Often we do this when we are at our wits’ end, when we cannot solve the problems on our own, and when we see our own weaknesses mirrored in the world around us.

At a deeper level, we pray for spiritual states that we feel are lacking so that we can grow and evolve. We may pray for enlightenment, nirvana, heaven, liberation, and God-realization. Prayer can be selfish or selfless, it can be forceful or subtle, it can be for little things or life-changing events, and it can be for worldly things or spiritual states.

Prayer is communication. It can range from the superficial to the profound: it can be a simple conversation, it can evolve to progressively deeper levels of communication, and eventually, it can become a state of communion. Prayer thus evolves as a potent way to communicate with God. Prayer is about connection and how we activate the flow of Transmission through that connection. Prayer is also about how we eventually establish a state of osmosis in that flow.

The concept is similar to the way fluids create differentials across cell walls in plants and animals so that nutrients can flow into the cells for nourishment. In prayer we create a similar differential between the Divine and ourselves to allow Divinity to flow into us and nourish us on a spiritual level. It is simple science. We create that differential by cultivating a state of vacuum in our heart so that the current of Divinity flows in, eventually leading to a state of osmosis with the Divine. That state of vacuity or negation also establishes a relationship of devotion with the Divine. And this is what allows us to attain the state of highest purity.





How to Pray


When we pray, both the manner and the matter are important. The manner is the way we pray. What is our attitude at the time? How do we create a condition within us so that the current of Divinity flows into our heart?

The process is so simple, so beautiful, and so scientific. The attitudes of humility, supplicancy, innocence, and insignificance create a vacuum in the heart so that the current from the Source flows in and enlivens the connection, just as electrical current flows from the positive to the negative pole in an electrical wire. Our job is to create the negative polarity by allowing a receptive, yielding state within the heart.

If we are not yielding, if our attitude is strong or demanding, with self-importance or force, then no vacuum is created in the heart, so there is no flow. It is a natural phenomenon, and our manner creates the condition for the flow to be activated or not. The subtlety in the way we offer prayer makes a huge difference to this flow. How gentle and yielding is our request? How light is our touch? Also, the moment prayer becomes a ritual it loses its potency.

I was once with Chariji in his bedroom while we were traveling, and at one point he woke up, sat on the bed, and closed his eyes. After a few moments the whole atmosphere in the room changed. It was so palpable. After he had finished, I asked him what he had been doing, and he replied, “Praying to Babuji.” Prayer can be such a potent practice, and it’s largely underutilized by most of us.

In a way, prayer is an inner cry where pearls of tears slowly flow down our face and beautify the inner complexities of the heart. A prayerful heart carries the eternal fragrance or essence of Divinity wherever it goes. It is an expression of love that can only be shared with the Beloved. A heart drowned in prayer keeps us alert to our goal, and this absorbency also helps us to recognize our defects and find possible solutions to remove them.

Then there is the matter, the subject of our prayers. We pray for many different things. One type of prayer is for the removal of unwanted behaviors, worries, concerns, or situations that bring us suffering. Such prayers are usually a cry for help. They are often to alleviate the sufferings of others. They can also be for our own suffering, especially when the situation is dire and no help is coming in other ways. This is the last resort of a karma yogi. When such a prayer is a cry of feeling from one’s heart, it is easily heard.

The second type of prayer is a very positive cry for continuous improvement, to acquire noble qualities, to grow and evolve. The following are some examples of such prayerful suggestion that I like very much.





The Practice of Prayerful Suggestion


All humanity is developing correct thinking,

right understanding, and an honest approach to life.

They are attaining rightness in action and

perfection in character.

Everything surrounding us—people,

the air particles, the birds, the trees—is

deeply absorbed in Godly remembrance.

All people of the world are growing peace-loving.



Then there are prayers where we don’t need anything to change. Instead we offer prayers filled with gratitude, accepting whatever is happening in the moment. Take, for example, when the heart is ecstatic and joyful, and we are able to share our joy with God, just as we share our sorrow with an inner cry. When the heart rejoices in this state of reverence and gratitude, it connects us with Divinity. In all societies, this inner joy is expressed prayerfully through dance, devotional songs, art, etc.

But even our gratitude is in response to a particular state, in this case the feeling of joy and ecstasy. There is still an expectation that we are grateful for something wonderful that has happened.

The Heartfulness Prayer operates at a different level altogether—one where we do not entreat any change. Instead, we offer three simple statements that define our human condition. The words remind us of our spiritual goal, the obstacles we face on the journey, and what helps us to reach there. There is no stated expectation in this Prayer, but there is still the feeling of differential, that we are not yet “up to that stage,” that there is an infinite journey ahead of us, and that we must continually refine and remove our wishes if there is a hope to experience finer and finer states. While offering this Prayer, we honor the present moment in our journey as well as acknowledging that the journey must continue.

The Heartfulness Prayer is done at bedtime for ten to fifteen minutes, to help us connect with our Source before sleep. It is also done for a few minutes before meditating in the morning as a way of resetting that connection. By beginning and ending the day this way, a connection is established with the Source throughout the day and night. And, over time, self-mastery develops through this inner connection.





Heartfulness Prayer


Sit in a comfortable position, gently close your eyes, and relax. With a feeling of humility and love, silently and slowly let these words resonate within the space in your heart. You can repeat them a couple of times, pausing in between.

O Master!

Thou art the real goal of human life.

We are yet but slaves of wishes

putting bar to our advancement.

Thou art the only God and Power

to bring us up to that stage.

Meditate for ten to fifteen minutes over the true sense of the words and try to get lost in them.

Let the feeling behind the words come to you. Allow yourself to melt into this prayerful feeling.



The words are a springboard—they are supposed to remind us of the feeling behind them. Eventually there will be no words at all, and a total acceptance of whatever the present moment gives, and this brings about the most profound state of prayerfulness.

The Heartfulness Prayer leads us toward the ultimate state of osmosis, of homeostasis, or total mergence with the Lord, but it is asymptotic. It never actually arrives. The differential we experience through prayer between God and ourselves will always be necessary, as only with that differential do we keep swimming onward, with the current flowing through our heart, connecting us to our Center.





What Is the Result of Prayer?


Two vital things come together in the act of prayer, and when they combine they can create the potential for lasting change and real growth. This is one of Nature’s open secrets.

On the one hand, prayer connects you with your highest Self through the heart, to dive so deep that you connect with the Source of everything. On the other hand, it uses the power of thought or suggestion to bring about change, and this we call sankalpa in Yoga.

Sankalpa works better than orders or instructions, because it is so potent. The English translation for sankalpa is usually “suggestion,” although it is not an adequate translation. A suggestion is a type of thought—one in which an idea is put forward for change, usually with some idea of improvement or vision. So a prayerful suggestion is a very subtle suggestion that resonates in a pure, open, loving heart connected to the Divine. As an aside, have you ever thought about the fact that negative suggestion is the cause of most of the failures of humanity? This is true even with the suggestions we make to ourselves, about ourselves, through auto-suggestion.

The way we use suggestion in prayer is most important. There is no need to say please, because even the word please is too heavy. And the offering of “May such and such a thing happen,” while slightly gentler, is also not subtle enough. How can we pray so that we do not disturb the divine silence? That is the ideal prayer.

These two processes of connecting and sankalpa combine like elements in a chemical reaction to create a dynamic state of communion with our inner essence. In prayer we are deep within the heart, so the thought or feeling we offer to the Lord is not just a thought, a theoretical, or an intellectual thing. It resonates across the canvas of our consciousness through the heart into the cosmic field, or quantum field if you like. The effect is so potent. It is no longer from our own individual level. It becomes a key to unlock evolution, to bring about transformation.

In the Heartfulness Prayer we commune with our highest Self, our inner Divinity. In the process we develop self-mastery by acknowledging the rightful place of this higher Self at the center of our lives. But it is not only an acknowledgment. We actually refer to that higher Self when we are prayerful, and so gradually we master the art of listening to the heart.

The words of the prayer are supposed to invoke feeling in us. Once feeling is there, we no longer need the words. A time comes when the prayerful state is always there, when the few seconds we take to offer prayer at night expand into twenty-four hours, when our inner Master is always in focus, and we are always in tune with ourselves, prayerfully maintaining the condition we have.

We are prayerful, we are maintaining the condition, and we are allowing it to grow. So no matter what we are doing—studying, watching television, taking a shower, eating breakfast, with friends, partying—the inner connection is always there.

That is the beauty of Heartfulness. It doesn’t take away any of our time. When we master the practice, it requires less and less time, and yet it remains a twenty-four-hour business.

So start with the words. Each word of this bedtime prayer can unlock some sort of feeling in your heart. Follow that feeling, contemplate on that feeling, and sleep in that mood. It will transform your life.





CHAPTER 6



ATTITUDE





IMAGINE THAT NOW you are doing these four Heartfulness practices every day: Relaxation, Meditation, Cleaning, and Prayer. Even for the best of us, doing any set of practices day after day can become a repetitive process, whether it is swimming, athletics, playing a musical instrument, calligraphy, cardiac surgery, or meditation. The mechanics are always repetitive. So what makes an endeavor come alive and develop vibrancy? It is attitude and interest. Attitude is 95 percent of success. I have found that the attitudes of love, humility, and prayerfulness have helped me a lot.

Think of it like this: you ask a girl out on a first date to the cinema, and you are so keen to meet her that you arrive an hour beforehand, or even earlier. You anticipate her arrival with so much inner excitement. But then what happens if you are waiting and she doesn’t show up until five minutes before the movie begins? It feels like eternity, and you are so restless. Do you have the same sort of impatience, enthusiasm, and passion for meditation? Do you feel so inspired to meet your inner Self during meditation? That attitude brings life to meditation.

Before you go to sleep, anticipate your meditation in the morning. Suggest to your higher Self, “I am eagerly looking forward to meeting you tomorrow morning.” Practice with such interest that you become cognizant of everything that passes through you, both the transmission and the samskaras. The samskaras were yours before they went out, so feel the difference when they are gone. It helps so much to create fascination, passion, and restlessness toward the practice itself. Otherwise it is only labor, dry and mechanical, and then it is not worthwhile.

Imagine a laborer on the farm, earning his daily wage doing a lot of hard physical work, but complaining about his work constantly. He may work the whole day, but he does not build the same muscle mass as another man who goes to the gym, only spending half an hour a day working out. It is all a matter of attitude. If your practice is purely mechanical, if you think, “Oh no! I have to wake up and meditate,” or if you do it only to satisfy someone else, there is no need to do it at all, because you will waste your time.

With anything that you do, make sure you do it joyfully and cheerfully. And if you really enjoy meditation, you can do it again and again throughout the day. Of course you don’t need to stop doing other things, but there is no need to limit yourself to once every morning.





A Daily Routine


Over the years I’ve learned another very important attitude from my Guides, which has helped me to deepen my meditation practice and bring it alive: automatism. What do I mean by this? There are two aspects to automatism. The first is that I learned to recall the meditative state at any given moment, even with my eyes open, and the second is that I fixed my timings so as to establish a biological clock in my practice.

What is this biological clock? You have probably heard about the classic behavioral experiments carried out by the Russian scientist Dr. Ivan Pavlov in the 1890s. He performed experiments in which he rang a bell and served food to dogs at the same time every day. He conditioned the dogs for some time, then one day he rang the bell and gave no food so the dogs went crazy, barking and salivating profusely. That is a learned associated response.

We also develop a learned associated response by meditating at the same time every day, and after some time as soon as we sit to meditate we easily go into meditation because we are attuned to it. It is as simple as starting with a resolution to fix your timing for meditation and sticking to it. It may be six o’clock, seven o’clock, or whatever time works for you. The main thing is to be consistent. It is more important to be consistent than to meditate one day at eight, one day at nine, one day at six, and one day at three in the morning, for two hours or one hour. Then, after some time, you will one day realize that you feel the same way as the salivating dogs the day you are not able to meditate at your regular hour. Do you miss it? That is the key.

When your meditations are predictable, others also respect your routine and give you space. Once your friends and family know you meditate at six o’clock, they will not disturb you at that time. But if you keep meditating randomly, no one knows when you meditate and then they will disturb you.

I grew up in a village in Gujarat in India. In the morning after sunrise, the buffaloes were let free into the village and the farms for grazing. In the evening they all came back together, entering the village, and each one found its own street, and in that street its own khoont, the stump to which it was tied up at night. It didn’t go anywhere else, even by mistake. It didn’t make mistakes. It went to the right house, the right stump, and was tied there for the night.

We can also fix our place for meditation. We sometimes have the habit of meditating on the sofa one morning, on the bed the next, and on the train when we are running late for work. But it helps to fix our place, because the atmosphere in that place becomes refined over time. Then when we sit it is so much easier to meditate. If we are as wise as the buffaloes, we will find one place.





Love Attracts


Another beautiful thing that I have learned over the years is that love attracts. People who have a hard heart and a harsh face repel grace, whereas a joyful heart attracts grace easily and naturally. When I worked in business, with fifty employees, I came to know the differences between people. There was a spectrum of facial expressions and attitudes in their work. When someone worked joyfully and came on time, I wanted to work with that person, and I was happy to have them in the organization. If a person was always complaining, “I don’t like this,” “I will not do this,” “I cannot come now,” it was not so easy to tolerate them, and when they went away, nobody missed them. But a really good worker, a really good employee who mastered the work, was missed even when they were absent for a day. Their absence spoke louder than their presence.

Similarly, in our spiritual practice, we move to another dimension if we are able to bring about regularity, cheerfulness, and restlessness to achieve the best.

Staying in tune with that pedaling all the time, with that spiritual condition we achieve in the morning, is not going to disturb our daily activities. In fact, when we are in higher levels of consciousness, the time we spend working also reduces. Work requires less and less time, and when we need to study we are able to read with a calm, peaceful, and composed mind. We absorb everything in one reading. Others have to read the same passage again and again.

Through Heartfulness practices our actions move toward perfection, although there will always be room for improvement, and we will always be striving to become perfect. The Guide is also striving to achieve perfection, both within as well as in the work, constantly asking, “How much can I change so that my work becomes more effective?” All of us can try our best to become better and better all the time.





Cooperation


One quality that is vital in spiritual practice is cooperation. Imagine for a moment that we are going on a trek to the summit of Mount Everest, or as an astronaut we are journeying into space. We accept the importance of following instructions in those situations. Also, we accept the importance of following a doctor’s advice when we have a life-threatening illness. Similarly, on the spiritual journey it is important to follow a Guide who has mastered the journey, because we are traversing the inner universe.

It is not that meditation gives us everything, but meditation done properly creates a condition, and that condition changes us. Once that inner environment is changed, faith develops in a natural way. Once faith develops, acceptance also comes. Once acceptance is established, surrender develops. Then we fall in love with the Giver, and this leads to losing ourselves in a state of oneness with the Giver; it becomes child’s play. This is known as mergence in spirituality. So when understood in this way, spiritual growth is only difficult for those of us who cannot cooperate.





The Power of Suggestion


Heartfulness is based on the power of suggestion, which is also known as sankalpa. We have already touched upon this in the earlier section on prayer. But there are different levels of subtlety of suggestion, which are demonstrated in the following example:

Three friends go out to dinner. The restaurant is busy, and they are impatiently waiting to order their food, as they are in a rush.

One of them shouts at the waiter as he is passing by, “Hey, come here! We want to order!”

It is an order. The waiter acknowledges him and says he will be back soon. Five minutes pass and another waiter comes by.

The second friend is more courteous and says, “We would like to order.”

It is a request—not as forceful, but still commanding. The second waiter also replies that he will return shortly.

A while later, the waiter returns, and the third friend smiles and suggests, “We are ready whenever you are, thanks.”

The waiter smiles back and takes the order.

The last one gives the subtlest suggestion of the three, more like a hint. And what a grand difference there is between these three approaches. Which do you think has the most potent effect? As with everything in nature, the subtlest is always the most effective. A forceful approach is more likely to meet with resistance, just like in Newton’s third law of motion: for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.

Similarly, you can use different levels of subtlety of thought while doing your practice. For example, while doing the Cleaning, imagine if you are thinking, “These impressions have to go! My boyfriend has disappointed me, and all of this anger I am feeling has to go out from my back!” With such a forceful approach, you will struggle, because when you try to remove a specific thing by force, you will actually deepen its effect. The moment you sit with the idea that “This must go,” you will make it worse.

There is a more relaxed, subtler way to do it: sit peacefully and first create a prayerful state deep within your heart. Then offer the suggestion so lightly that there is as little force as possible behind it: “My Lord, may this be removed.” It is a prayerful suggestion, deep in the heart. This is another reason why prayer is so important—as we master the art of prayer, the more potent our subtle power will become to bring about change.

If we are forceful, with the thought that, “This and this must go today,” something will still happen, no doubt. Whether we order it, request it, make a subtle suggestion, or we are prayerful with love, something will always work, because nature always responds, but the response is always proportional to the level of subtlety used.

So when you practice Cleaning in the evening, try to go deep into your heart and be as gentle and subtle as you can with the instructions, and observe how purity simply descends when Cleaning is done.

As we go further and further in spiritual life, a time comes when no thought is needed, as things simply happen. In the beginning we go on refining ourselves, and our prayerful suggestions become more and more tender: “May this happen,” “May this be removed,” “May she develop courage.” But then after some time we relax, as whatever has to happen will happen. Eventually we wonder, “I didn’t do anything, but something happened today.” That is because now we are no longer directing the work; we are simply allowing the work to flow through us.

Does this mean that we should remain idle from day one in this process of suggestion? No, we first have to learn the process, by going through the steps, in order for subtlety to develop. Start and see where it takes you. When you practice Cleaning, for example, start with the sankalpa that all complexities and impurities are going away from your back. Eventually a time will come when the moment you sit in the evening, you won’t need the words. Things will just start happening.

It helps to understand suppositions. Throughout our daily activities, we continuously suppose things: “Look at his shirt. Where did he buy it?” “Oh, her dress is not so good,” “My lecturer is in good spirits,” “My mood is not okay today.” We continuously suppose with the voice inside our head, even if we do not voice our suppositions aloud. These thinking patterns are likes and dislikes, as we discussed earlier in the book. Do they cultivate stillness?

There is a much more productive way to use the mind. Imagine if you had been there when the River Ganga started trickling down from its original source, at that initial moment. If you had walked alongside the very first drop of the first rivulet, it would have been wonderful—where it flowed, the kind of resistance it encountered, how it went around obstacles, and then ultimately arrived at the ocean. Likewise, you can observe the moment your ideas take birth in your heart and see where they go and how they affect your condition. Like a river flowing, your ideas evolve into something greater, and you can observe them flowing and evolving as they grow and expand. Witnessing your thoughts arising, and allowing them to flow through you, gently and subtly, is mindfulness, and also the first step of Pratyahara in Yoga. It will allow you to use the power of thought wisely.

When nothing further is explainable in words, you are lost in your own Self, and your thoughts are in osmosis with the Divine. Then the subtlest and most potent of all sankalpas is possible, as you are simply an instrument for a higher purpose.





CHAPTER 7



MEDITATION, YOGA, AND NEUROSCIENCE





Into the Unknown


BECAUSE OF TRANSMISSION, we are able to dive deep during meditation very early in our practice and become profoundly absorbed in the inner state. This is known as Samadhi in Sanskrit, and is highly sought after in Yoga. It is the eighth and culminating stage in Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga. In his Yoga Sutras, Patanjali describes the first level of Samadhi as a stonelike consciousness where we don’t feel anything, where we are oblivious to what is happening because we have journeyed into parts of the mind beyond awareness. In Heartfulness, quite quickly we are able to go to subtler levels and experience the lighter, more evolved states of Samadhi. In the second state we are in a dreamlike, subconscious Samadhi, and in the third we are fully aware and absorbed simultaneously. This is known as Sahaj Samadhi.

Sahaj Samadhi is a condition of deep absorption in meditation while at the same time being fully conscious of everything that is going on. In the Yoga Shastras this is known as the Turiya condition, or the fourth state. Everything is in view. We can also continue this state during the day, while we are busy doing other things. We are simultaneously focusing on work, on the surroundings, on the TV, on something happening outside, and still remaining in communion with our inner spiritual state, on the Transmission, the condition that is prevailing within, something that is about to come into our system, thoughts that arise, and the next step we should be taking. We remain peaceful, seeing all of these things at the same moment. In Yoga this is known as the Turiyatit state, where we have 360-degree consciousness with eyes open. There is no need to focus on any particular thing. The moment we focus on one thing, it is no longer meditation but concentration.





Aum and Neuroscience


We can understand these various stages both from the perspectives of Yoga and neuroscience. In Yoga, Aum is the original sound that was manifested at the time of creation. And that sound is still there in our innate memory within the soul, starting from A to U to M and, finally, the emptiness that follows the M. It is the soundless sound that follows the M that we must capture. These three sounds and the soundless sound that follows have tremendous significance, as it is the empty silence that follows the sound of Aum that reminds us of the fourth state, or Turiya.

These states of consciousness are experienced every day by all of us, and can also be measured with an EEG machine:

The alert, wakeful states are characterized by brainwaves of higher frequencies: Gamma waves, 31–120 hertz, occur with hyper brain activity such as learning and problem solving. Beta waves, 13–30 hertz, occur when we are active in conversation and other activities. Alpha waves, 8–12 hertz, occur when we are relaxed, contemplative, absorbed in a beautiful piece of music, or when we are starting to meditate.

The dream state is characterized by theta waves, 4–7 hertz, and occurs when we are drowsy and drifting into sleep and dreams.

The deep sleep state is characterized by delta waves, 0.5–3 hertz.



In the wakeful states, consciousness is moving outward, away from the Source in search of knowledge, from which is born the field of modern science. When the brainwave frequencies become slower, it shows that we are turning inward and moving into deeper states of consciousness. The consciousness of the dream state is somewhere between the waking and sleeping state, where we dream of slokas, poetry, ghazals, etc. It is all about the inner search and is related to the inner world. In the deep-sleep state, consciousness gravitates toward its Source, the soul.

You may be familiar with the scientific research that has been done in the West on meditators practicing Transcendental Meditation, various Buddhist systems, and mindfulness. They have conducted experiments on monks and ordinary people, new meditators as well as experienced meditators who have done ten- to twenty-thousand hours of meditation.

In research studies, meditators have experienced delta frequencies, normally found during deep sleep, the dreamlike theta frequencies, the relaxed alpha states, and spikes of high-frequency gamma brainwaves in patterns not normally associated with wakeful states. In fact, in yogis who meditate regularly, gamma oscillations were found to be much more common and significantly greater in amplitude than in other groups. So the spectrum of brainwave frequencies expanded in both directions as a result of meditation.

The brainwave spectrum of the Turiya state encompasses the full range of the spectrum, even that of deep sleep, or S\sushupti, indicated by delta waves, although the person meditating is simultaneously completely aware. Yogis and monks crave this state with all their might, and sometimes meditate for thousands of hours, performing penances and practices in order to reach it.

With the help of Transmission, it becomes quite easy to experience this Turiya state. Even if you have never ever meditated in your life, when you are exposed to Heartfulness Meditation with Transmission, your consciousness awakens at a different level so that you expand into the Turiya condition. While your body is fully relaxed, your mind perceives things. You are not sleeping, but you are in a relaxed state that is as rejuvenating as deep sleep. That is the true Turiya condition.

And then we learn how to take this condition out into daily life with eyes open. We transcend Turiya to the Turiyatit state. The Turiya state is available only when we are in meditation, whereas the Turiyatit state emerges when we carry that deep meditative state within us all the time. It encompasses all the states: A, U, M, and the soundless sound.

We transcend

from A, the external wakeful state,

to U, the inner dream-like state,

to M, the deep-sleep state of sushupti,

to the soundless silence of the Turiya state,

and, finally, to the Turiyatit condition.



So while it is good to be actively meditating regularly, it is even better to be in a meditative state, all the time. We are actively meditating every morning and meditatively active all the time. We actually don’t have to do much except close our eyes and be receptive.





CHAPTER 8



GUIDANCE





The Guide


A GOOD TEACHER or guide is a blessing in any field of learning, because they help us to master a subject. We know it from experience, so it doesn’t need an explanation. Still, it is interesting to note that there is something called coherence, where the teacher and the student resonate with each other, and a heart to heart osmosis happens in which skills and knowledge are transferred. In fact, scientists are now realizing that much more is transferred and transmitted heart-to-heart than they’d previously thought, just as happens between a mother and her children.

In worldly disciplines, those who excel know that they have to keep learning and moving forward if they are to stay ahead of the game in their profession or skill. The greatest athletes and sports stars have coaches to maintain peak performance; peer review in cutting-edge academic research is a natural part of the process of publication of a book or an article; and the best musicians in the world continue to learn from one another so as to keep improving their skills. Anyone who is really good at what they do wants guidance and feedback. That is the evolutionary approach to learning and life. And the further we go in any field, the more important it is to have a guide to help us move forward on the path. This is even more important in the spiritual field, where we are constantly venturing into new, unexplored areas, so the Guide is an important person in the life of a spiritual seeker.

What is the significance of having a living Guide, or Guru, and how do we utilize their presence? In the very early days of Heartfulness, in the early 20th century, there were only around two hundred followers, and hardly five or ten of them would be with Lalaji at any given time. One-to-one interactions were very easy, as in the ancient traditions of gurukula in India and Socratic learning in the West. In ancient times, students lived with their Guide for certain periods of time in order to be trained, just as Christ’s disciples lived with him.

But there are now over a million people practicing Heartfulness around the world. So how will everyone spend personal time with their Guides? In order to adapt to modern times, the whole Heartfulness system has evolved so that our spiritual progress continues without requiring the actual physical presence of the Guide.

But if you do have an opportunity to visit the Guide or attend a meditation session with him, something magical happens, as you both sit with eyes closed in meditation. He does thorough cleaning, prepares you for the spiritual journey, triggers the start of the journey, and also prepares the ground ahead for where you are going. So a few things happen in his presence.

This process is optimized and accelerated if you have prepared yourself ahead of time to make the most of the opportunity. And then afterward, if your craving is of such an order that you can invite his spiritual essence to come to you, then the journey from one level to another starts.

There are so many misunderstandings about the relationship between the Heartfulness Guide and a seeker. Some people think they have to personally be with him for there to be any benefit, but it is better to close your eyes in meditation and wrap him inside your heart. Unless you interiorize his spiritual presence in your heart, being with him will be of no use anyway. The physical presence of a living Guide can be of great benefit if you have interiorized his presence and resonate in tune with him. Then you will discover that the external and the internal are the same.

It also helps to have an affectionate relationship with the Guide so that love develops. The type of sentimental relationship you have depends on your life’s experiences. You may consider him as your grandfather, father, mother, friend, or Guru. His help is always there. Please try it and see the result. Invoking his presence is good enough. If you thoughtfully invoke him, asking for help, it will be there.

I can think of so many personal examples of this. There have been many times when there were irreversible situations in my life, when I would think to myself, “No, this is a dead end; there is no rescue anymore.” Then, automatically, my attention would move toward my Guide. My heart would start beating faster and, surprisingly, the problems simply disappeared as if a miracle had taken place.

Then, after four or five experiences like that, I started to feel, “Enough of these miracles.” I became tired of experiences and miracles, and the feeling that remained was, “I want to become like him.”

A time comes when we want to become like the Guide. Now does that mean we should become like him in physical appearance? No, there is no need to grow a beard because he has a beard, wear similar clothes, or eat the foods he likes. That will not take us anywhere. What works is to try to emulate his attitude, his practice, his etiquette, and his relationship with his Guide.

When we read Babuji’s diaries as a disciple of Lalaji, it both humbles and motivates us. He writes that he did a few things simultaneously. These I have tried to emulate and found them very useful:

Always remain connected through your heart with your Guide.

Adjust yourself with your present inner condition and try to absorb it and deepen it.

Prepare for the condition that is to come next; wait for it, anticipate it, and look forward to it.

Always be vigilant about your surroundings: What must you be doing?



When Babuji later became Lalaji’s successor, all of these things happened together, and his eyes also had 360-degree global vision: “What is happening with this seeker, that seeker, this continent, that continent?” The human mind has so many channels, and it can do so many things at one time.

The Guide is not God. When we think like that, we bring religion into the spiritual world. No doubt he is Godly in nature, but he is not God. We are also trying to become Godly; that is our endeavor in Heartfulness. We don’t become the Guide, but we can become like the Guide in his inner attributes and qualities.

Another misunderstanding is that the Guide is there to solve all our worldly and emotional problems. Heartfulness is all about taking those problems into our own hands and solving them for ourselves. Heartfulness teaches us how to do that. It prepares us from within, and it strengthens us in such a way that we become masters of our lives. That is why our Guides have said again and again, “We don’t make disciples; we make masters.” By mastering our lives, we learn how to live smoothly and peacefully and go gracefully toward our goal.

How lightly this journey has to be taken up! When even the self is nonexistent, where is there room for problems? If we remain focused on problems, we will gravitate more and more toward them. When the self is nonexistent, where is there room even for bliss? We move beyond all of these things.





What About God?


Some of us believe in God; others do not. It actually does not matter when you approach Heartfulness from the perspective of personal experience. A person who does not believe in God generally says, “I have not experienced God, so how can I believe?” and those who do believe in God generally do not have personal experience upon which to base that claim.

If you ask anyone, “Have you experienced God yourself, or do you believe in God because your parents or your priest say God exists?” they will generally say it is because others believe, not because they have any personal experience of God.

So how do we rise above this to experience God?

The Heartfulness approach is scientific, so you are welcome to start either with God’s existence or nonexistence in your experiment. Then, in a scientific way, you can observe within and come to your own conclusion. The results of practice will affirm the efficacy of the system to your heart. If you are on the wrong path, your heart will immediately tell you. If you are on the right path and the experience satisfies your heart, it’s a positive signal to proceed further. As you proceed, you come across so many varying states of consciousness—meditative and nonmeditative states, peaceful and not-so-peaceful states, etc.—and you will become cognizant, pushing you to trust the meditative states more and more.

Gradually you learn the art of remaining in the meditative state in all your day-to-day activities, and this happens whether you are a believer in God or a nonbeliever. For a believer, the journey is easier, since it is a positive approach. The negative approach, like many other negative things in life, is always difficult to circumvent. Nevertheless, this practice ensures that nonbelief soon transmutes into a heartfelt positive signal of the subtle presence of the higher Being.

After all, you will be convinced of the existence of God when you experience Divinity within yourself during meditation and when you become more and more Godly in your own person. Then you can confidently say, “Yes, I know now that God exists,” and there will be substance to it.

I often give the analogy of currencies. There are so many currencies worldwide, and they are supposedly backed by resources, such as gold, silver, oil, minerals, and nowadays even political stability. The more resources and stability the country has, the stronger the currency. On what backing are we claiming that God exists? If we don’t have the backing of experience, it is no different from saying that God does not exist.

Through meditation, first we have a temporary experience of peace, calmness, stillness, and bliss. For a moment we seem to lose ourselves in something unknown; we don’t know what it is. It is pleasant, but it is temporary. We might think, “Maybe this is the Godly experience, but we are not so sure about it.” Eventually a more tangible proof of God’s existence within happens when that experience becomes more and more frequent, and then permanent. This process is greatly aided by the Transmission flowing from the Source into our hearts during Meditation. This can really only be understood well through personal experience.

To use another worldly analogy, there is no point becoming a millionaire for a month. Let’s say somebody says, “I will lend you one hundred million dollars today, and after one month I will take it back.” It is just like saying, “While I was visiting my Guide, I had a great experience, a superb experience, but afterward I was not able to keep that spiritual state.” Are we like the millionaire who loses his or her millions after a month? After we leave the atmosphere of our Guide’s presence, will we again be “high and dry,” spiritually speaking?

When we return home after being with the Guide, we will meditate and have experiences. At times they may be intense, and at other times they may not be so fulfilling. When our meditation loses its intensity, we usually ask a trainer, “Please can I have a meditation session with you? My condition seems to have gone away. I would like to regain my connection with God, with my inner Self.” So we meditate with a trainer, we feel the flame alive in our heart, and again we feel God within. But then, after some time, again it fizzles out. So we are constantly connecting and disconnecting ourselves. Ideally, we want that experience of connection to become permanent.

Why do we have such beautiful experiences? What is the purpose? Where do they take us? When we are in deep meditation, for hours we don’t know what is happening, we are so lost. It is like intoxication. At the same time it is such a pleasant condition. But is it necessary? At each stage, experiences are bound to arise. It is not that the Guide gives them to us or God gives them to us. When a train is moving, let us say from Rome toward Paris, the change in scenery reminds us that we are moving, that we are progressing. That is one reason for having different experiences when we sit for meditation—to give us confidence. Otherwise, if we go on continuously experiencing the same thing, we will lose interest.

This happens especially at the earlier stages of our inner journey. There are an infinite number of experiences we can have while we are journeying through the chakras associated with worldly existence, which are found in the chest area, known as the Heart Region, or Pind Pradesh. After this, the Guide moves us into another galaxy, the higher chakras associated with various parts of the head. Here we are no longer in the world of duality, of worldly existence. We are in a whole new dimension. This journey through the chakras, known as the yatra, describes our progress and our expansion of consciousness, and we will return to it later on.





CHAPTER 9



TRANSFORM YOUR SELF





AFTER STARTING HEARTFULNESS practice, many of us feel a lot of inner change. Our consciousness expands, old habits and reactions drop off, and we become more aware of our place in the world. We are drawn to simplify our lifestyle also, as things that once seemed so important lose their glamour and enticement. But lifestyle transformation also demands alertness and some active cooperation, as it is not all automatic. We need to refine our thoughts, emotions, behavior, and attitudes.

I would like to share with you some of the wisdom Heartfulness has to offer in improving and refining our lifestyle. These practices and approaches have worked so well for me. The first thing is to want to change and then to create a direction for that change. This starts by having an intention.





Intention


To achieve anything in life, whether worldly or spiritual in nature, we must first simplify our intention. There is a story from my youth that explains it beautifully.

Back in the late 1970s, I was sitting with my first Guide, Babuji, on his verandah. It was a wintry morning in December in Shahjahanpur, northern India. He was alone, and I was seated in a corner.

He gestured to me, saying, “Come,” so I went and sat near him. He scratched a white line on his hand with his fingernail, and it made a mark on his skin because it was so cold.

I wondered what Babuji was doing.

He said, “This is a water canal.”

It was like a make-believe game. Then, from the same canal, he scratched his hand again and drew another line, so that the canal was divided into two streams.

“You understand?”

I said, “What, Babuji?”

“Fifty percent of the power is reduced.”

Then he scratched himself again, producing a third canal.

“Now do you understand?”

I said, “Yes, Babuji.”

The power was further reduced.

Taking an everyday example, how many applications do you have on your phone? If you leave them all running, the battery drains very quickly. In life, if you run too many applications, you also drain yourself very quickly, and you are not happy with one focus.

This principle applies in all fields, including career, relationships, and self-development. Having one application, one goal, takes you somewhere, through the optimum utilization of inner resources. This ability to focus on one goal develops naturally out of meditative practice, as we learn to simplify our thought process from scattered to focused. It is known as Dharana in Yoga, which is the sixth limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga. We regulate our mind and refine our consciousness.

But this is not the final outcome. Over time we go much further than this in Heartfulness Meditation. It leads us to 360-degree consciousness, enabling us to focus on all aspects of daily life plus the inner state at the same time. So it is not about running away from life. It simply means that our life’s main purpose is clear; it is evolutionary, and everything else that happens slowly moves in tune with that purpose.

Simplicity of intention is strengthened by practicing the Heartfulness Prayer. Every day we are reminded of our inner goal—it sets our direction like the rudder of a ship. Because we go deep inside and listen to the heart, we learn to integrate the inside and outside, and that is the key to self-mastery.

Then we can be playing soccer, driving, cooking dinner, reading a story to our children, or running a business, and all the while still have an underlying focus on our inner state. Our consciousness can be in osmosis there while we happily attend to other things.

With this clarity of mind, it is easy to sail smoothly through life and the infinite ocean of the inner journey with the right understanding. That is how we weave our destiny.

To be happy, our inner and outer states need to be in harmony, otherwise we feel unsettled and unbalanced. We cannot be true to ourselves if what we feel on the inside and what we are on the outside are not in sync. As Polonius said to his son, Laertes, in Shakespeare’s Hamlet:

This above all: to thine own self be true,

And it must follow, as the night the day,

Thou canst not then be false to any man.





Listen to Your Heart


The heart is a barometer of how we feel about everything, including ourselves—how we feel about our thoughts and emotions, our behavior, and about the choices we make in life. If we are happy, then we will not hear from the heart. When we are about to choose well, the heart simply remains a silent witness to the decision we are contemplating. There is natural contentment. When we are not happy with ourselves, the heart is restless. It lets us know that something needs to change.

Listening to the heart’s signals is the first step. The second step is to make use of those signals, to ask the heart questions in such a way that we get clear indications. Slowly we get the hang of it, and the more we listen the clearer the messages become. When we don’t listen, we lose the art of listening to the heart. Neuroscientists describe it as losing the neural circuitry or pathways that we do not use. Then it takes a lot of effort to reactivate them. The more we use the neural pathways, the stronger they become.

Now comes the third step: having listened to the voice of the heart, do we have the courage to follow it?

You probably know the story of Pinocchio, whose nose grew longer every time he lied. It is easy to tell a white lie to avoid conflict and unpleasantness, but what happens to our heart when we do? It starts pumping fast. When purity is compromised, the heart becomes heavy and anxious. Then what takes over? Discomfort, followed by guilt and regret. We start disliking ourselves: “How could I have done such a thing!”

Sometimes people lie to please their parents, or to avoid hurting another person, but even then, instead of lightness, joy, and confidence in our heart, we still often feel compromised. There are situations, however, where our heart chooses to put relationships above truthfulness as an ethical choice, avoiding danger or trouble. For example, what happens when we need to protect someone we love? There is quite a famous case of this in a painting, depicting a small boy during the Second World War being questioned by soldiers about the whereabouts of his parents. Of course he knew his parents were hiding in the cellar under the floorboards, but he also knew that if he told the soldiers, they would kill his parents. What would you do in this situation? Tell the truth or protect your parents? Again, it is your heart that will guide you. This art of listening to the heart brings contentment; we feel integrated, whole, and at peace with ourselves as a result.

Learning to listen to the heart is one thing, but there is an added dimension to this process: our heart is not static. Our inner environment is constantly changing as we expand and refine our consciousness, or restrict our consciousness, as the case may be. The field of consciousness is fluid, so the reference point of the heart is dynamic. And everything about us is tied to our state of consciousness: the food we eat, the clothes we wear, the habits that slowly adjust to our changing level of evolution. We are always in a state of continuous improvement, a work in progress.

But it happens that sometimes we choose to go against our conscience, because our desires and mental justifications push us to make another choice. And until we change our thinking, we will keep on recycling those experiences and habits. So what do we do? There is always a choice. We can either do nothing, or we can choose to rectify the situation. There is a very effective Heartfulness practice we can do:





Let Go of Burdens


At bedtime, feel the divine presence in your heart, and repent for anything you have done wrong, even if unintentional. There is no recrimination in this process.

While deep in your heart, prayerfully resolve not to make the same mistake again. You will feel as if a burden has lifted.



You can also present any questions and confusions to your heart right after offering prayer. There is no need to seek an answer right away. Often, by the time you wake up, you will know the answer. Even if the answer comes in another form than words, you will surely have the solution.





Managing Emotions


Even when we have established a regular Heartfulness practice, more often than not we still struggle with emotional reactions to the ups and downs of daily life. Some days we feel calm with the world around us, while on other days we feel angry, anxious, upset, overexcited, or fearful. When we observe the patterns our emotional lives follow, we notice that there are certain cyclical rhythms in the ups and downs.

How can we work with emotions and reactions so that our lives are more in tune with a calm, inner meditative state? Yogic psychology provides us with such a beautiful and sophisticated way of understanding and refining our emotions, and this work complements the inner spiritual work.





Emotions and Feelings Arise in the Heart


The first thing we observe through meditation is that emotions and feelings arise in the heart. We feel things in the heart, not with our intellect or reasoning ability. While these feelings and emotions then affect our thinking process, especially through the limbic system of the midbrain, the initial impulses arise in the heart.

Not all of us are comfortable exploring the inner world of our feelings, simply because we have not been encouraged to do so as we were growing up, either at home or at school. Is it the physical heart that feels? No. It is the vibratory or energetic heart, also known as the subtle body. There is so much talk today of emotional intelligence, as defined by Daniel Goleman in his famous book, including the heart-based qualities of compassion, empathy, resilience, love, courage, and will, and these qualities are not physical in nature. They reside in the vibratory heart, which is where we also find the chakras of the heart. But whenever the vibratory heart is affected in any way, this then affects the physical heart. For example, if we become angry, our heart rate variability becomes erratic and our blood pressure goes up, even though the origin of the emotion is in the subtle body. So to improve our emotional intelligence, we need to work with the subtle body through the heart.





Emotions versus Feelings


The second thing we observe is the difference between emotions and feelings, especially as a result of the Cleaning process. Feelings are like pure fire without any smoke, where the wood burns clear and pure. Emotions are clouded or filtered, like fire with a lot of smoke due to dampness or impurities in the wood. And the purest feelings of all are like electricity, where there is not even any burning. Pure feelings are natural and helpful for our evolution, whereas emotions are clouded by impurities, just like smoky wood. What causes the impurities? The impressions, or samskaras, that settle in the heart that we spoke about earlier: the purer the heart, the clearer the feelings.





Feelings, Emotions, and the Chakras of the Heart


The third thing we observe is that the heart chakra consists broadly of five different energy centers, or chakras, associated with the five traditional elements of life: earth, space, fire, water, and air. These five elements are known in Yoga as the pancha bhutas, and each one has a particular spectrum of emotions and feelings that we master as we travel on our inner journey. In fact, feelings and emotions collect in the human system in quite a specific way, which we can map in our spiritual anatomy. Unless and until we master these chakras through spiritual practice, we will not master the emotions associated with them. Each of the five chakras is associated with a particular duality of feeling, and the dualities are known as the dwandwas, or opposites.

So as we purify and traverse each chakra of the heart, removing the impressions that have lodged there, as well as mastering the feelings and emotions associated with each, step-by-step we develop greater levels of emotional intelligence and maturity. Working with the spiritual anatomy of the chakras gives us so much insight into our emotions that I will now share with you some very practical tools to master them so that we are able to let go of subconscious patterns and redesign our destinies.





Spiritual Anatomy


What creates emotional turbulence in our consciousness? In a lake of water, energy creates turbulence in the form of waves and ripples. In the lake of consciousness, energy creates turbulence in the form of thoughts, feelings, and emotions.

We have already described the formation of samskaras in the section on Heartfulness Cleaning—the formation of knots of energy that arise due to our thoughts and experience—so now we will explore how this works with respect to various feelings and emotions.

The Heart Region of a human being is the region associated with the dualities of everyday life. Every chakra has its own polarity or duality of feelings. The first chakra, or point 1 of the Heart Region, is in the lower left part of the chest where the physical heart is found. This point is associated with the element of earth, and when we meditate we may see a glimpse of the color yellow in the inner environment. The spectrum of feelings here is desire versus contentment, which can be equated with the lack of desire known as vairagya in Yoga. At first it seems like each spectrum has a “good” and a “bad” to it, so contentment is positive and desire is negative. In a way that is correct, as desires for worldly things pull us down and create samskaras. But as the chakra is purified and we master the emotions there, we discover that both ends of the spectrum



Eventually, at point 1, the desire or craving for something higher propels us toward our spiritual goal while contentment brings peace, stability, and grounding in spiritual practice and poise and patience in worldly life. When we are pulled by desires for worldly possessions or sensuality, or when we are crippled by guilt, jealousy, or resentment, this chakra is clouded by desire-based impressions and becomes very heavy.

As we remove the desire-based attachments that pull us down, through Cleaning, and go deeper into the feelings and consciousness of the heart through Prayer, Meditation, and introspection, our emotions become less reactive, more and more subtle, and we eventually master the spectrum of desire and contentment associated with chakra 1 so that we can benefit both from restlessness toward the goal and contentment.

The second chakra, point 2 of the Heart Region, is on the lower right side of the chest. This is the soul chakra, where the element is ether, also known as space or akasha, and we glimpse the color red. At this point, we find so much peace that we don’t feel like doing worldly things. Whether a businessman, a student, or a stay-at-home parent, we lose interest in everything for some time, because peace is so inviting and we do not want to be disturbed or distracted from it. That is the quality of the second point.

The spectrum of feelings here is from anxiety or restlessness to peace. When the heart is clouded by samskaras, when we still carry a lot of heaviness at the first point of the heart, all that heaviness will evaporate to the second point. Then there can be no peace at the second point, because we feel anxious and worried. Instead we continually get pulled back into worldly entanglements, and the peace and joy of the soul eludes us. There are four main satellite points around chakra 1, known as A, B, C, and D, which are the points where impressions enter and first lodge in our system. (We will describe them in more detail shortly.) If these four points are kept healthy, and surrounded with a cleaner inner atmosphere, to the same extent we will not pollute our other chakras.

The third chakra, or point 3 of the Heart Region, is on the upper left side of the chest. This is the fire point, where we may glimpse the color white during meditation. The feelings at this chakra are more passionate and inspirational in nature, and the spectrum is that of anger versus love. We experience them according to the impressions and desires we hold: when anger and love are clouded by worldly desires, either one can pull us down into emotional entanglements, but when they are pure, both of them can propel us further on our journey.

Let’s start with love. Love for God and for the Guide blossom at this point, as we feel more and more gratitude for the inner progress we have experienced. Love fuels our journey, propelling us upward like a rocket. We start to develop an intense attachment to God and to the Guide who is taking us on this journey. Love takes us upward, just as a flame always points upward, burning everything else that hampers our progress. At chakra 3, the fire point, love is awakened toward the divine Source so that it transcends everyday human love and becomes alchemical in nature.

In its pure expression, anger is also uplifting and transformative. It is an evolutionary tool gifted to us for self-refinement, and is known in Yoga as krodha, one of the two divine emotions. It is a change agent, a natural warning sign that something needs to change. When we feel angry, an important step is to acknowledge that the change needs to happen within ourselves.

Unfortunately, most of us take our anger out on others, aggressively and forcefully, or we repress it inwardly in an unhealthy way, leading to depression. Those approaches are not helpful. But as we journey through chakra 3, we have the possibility to master anger and harness it for our evolution and onward journey. It becomes such a wonderful tool for change when we utilize it in a healthy way.

When love and anger are thus refined at point 3, this experience then translates to the next duality at point 4, on the upper right side of the chest. Courage and fear are the dual qualities of point 4. The more we are able to purify and ennoble love and anger at point 3, the better the quality of courage and fear we will have. This is the water point, where we may glimpse the color black, and the spectrum of feelings runs like the deep current of water, encompassing fear and courage.

When the heart is not yet pure, we tend to view fear as a negative emotion and courage as a positive emotion. Fear is associated with particular events, people, or situations from our past—for example, fear of snakes, fear of flying, fear of public speaking, fear of being alone in the dark, and fear of losing a person or thing. Fear is associated with our past experiences, and it can be heavy and crippling, leading to terror, stunting our confidence, and stifling our interest.

But when the heart is pure, fear is also pure and natural, and this “real fear” is the natural caution that encourages us to be careful, to develop self-discipline, to conserve our resources, and to stay on the path we have chosen. When we cultivate healthy caution as a quality, we don’t take anything for granted. This naturally leads to reverence and respect for all life forms, and gratitude and etiquette toward others in daily life.



At the opposite end of the spectrum is courage. Generally we think of courage as something very positive, as it is needed to move forward and develop confidence, even on the spiritual journey. But without fear as a counterbalance, courage can be reckless and can fuel the ego, leading to arrogance. Imagine a murderer or a thief with unlimited courage! So as the heart is purified and we traverse chakra 4, we learn to use both fear and courage for our evolution and advancement.

The love that has awakened at chakra 3 deepens at chakra 4 into something subtler, less passionate, and stronger, creating the foundation for courage. Just like in a marriage, the initial outer expression of love becomes subtler and deeper as love matures.

The fifth chakra, or point 5 of the Heart Region, is also known as the throat chakra in the older yogic traditions, and is the air point of the Heart Region. Here we may glimpse the color green, and the spectrum we experience here is from illusion and confusion at one end to clarity and wisdom at the other. When the field of consciousness in the heart is pure, the air element brings great clarity and wisdom, whereas confusion and illusion are an indication that there is turbulence. When this is the case it is an indication to pause and wait for clarity to come before making any decision. Confusion at point 5 is more likely to occur if there is any heaviness at points A, B, C, and D around chakra 1 of the heart, which then evaporates to points 2, 3, and 4 as well. When the heart is pure, each of these dualities helps to propel us forward on our journey through the Heart Region, and take us to the next stage, where we eventually transcend them all.

But for most of us, the heart is filled with accumulated complexities and impurities, and we continue to create more of them day by day. This is why we react so easily and get caught up in the entanglements of emotions. How are these impressions created? It all starts with simple wishes, likes, and dislikes. These then lead to desires, both positive and negative. All our desires, including the negative ones of aversion, arise in the heart and lead to impressions settling at the various satellite energy centers or points around chakra 1 of the Heart Region—points A, B, C, and D.





Points A, B, C, and D


We are constantly playing with likes and dislikes in our hearts, and they affect our thinking, often without us realizing it. When we like certain things and dislike others, if those responses stay in our emotional field, they settle at point C near point 1 on the lower left side of the chest area. This is the strategic point in our spiritual anatomy, as it is the landing point for impressions to enter our system. From point C the impressions gravitate toward various other satellite points near point 1 of the heart. This is because different emotions have different vibrations. For example, worldly worries settle at point A, sensuality and sexual desire settle at point B, and guilt settles at point D.

When we worry about our worldly problems and brood over them, it affects point A. None of us can escape worries. Actually, when we worry about challenges, it is a good indication that we have to act upon our concerns and solve the problems, and finding solutions strengthens our self-confidence and mental faculties. Whereas when we keep on worrying perpetually without solving the problems as they arise, it is only going to make it worse and create heaviness at point A.



Another part of human existence is our sexuality and sensual attraction toward others. When it is balanced and in moderation it is manageable, but when it overwhelms us, those impressions form at point B.

There is another emotion that creates deep impressions, and that is guilt. Guilt is perhaps the heaviest impression we can form. It arises out of something we did not do but should have done, or something we did but should not have done. Guilt gives rise to a lot of heaviness in the heart and settles at point D.

These points A to D are satellites around point 1 of the heart. They are only four subpoints of the thousands of subpoints in our spiritual anatomy, but they are four major ones that go on collecting impressions.

To find them, use your fingers to measure the distances as follows:

First, find the cavity at the base of the ribcage, in the middle, where the two halves meet.

Then measure one finger-width downward.

Then measure four fingers-width horizontally in a straight line toward the left side of the chest. This is point B.

Two fingers straight above that is point A.

Straight below point B, touching the lowest rib is point C.

Two fingers-width horizontal toward the left side is point D.

The nipple should be straight above. The midpoint between point D and the left nipple is point 1, the Hridaya chakra.



Why am I sharing this knowledge with you? So that you can start to be aware. When you observe what happens at points A, B, C, and D around your heart, you will notice that they are activated when you feel any of the associated emotions. When you notice emotions, you have an opportunity to adjust yourself and clean yourself, instead of judging and reacting. Try to observe your emotions with an attitude of self-acceptance. Without it, it is difficult to graciously let go of impressions, because instead you will end up thinking about them, or feeling bad about yourself, deepening the impressions. You will need self-acceptance to get to first base!

When these impressions are removed by Cleaning, you will no longer be bothered as much by desires, and the result is contentment. When the impressions continue to create heaviness, you will remain disturbed.

The state of purity or impurity at these points A, B, C, and D has a ripple effect outward on the rest of your system. When there is purity, it evaporates to point 2 of the Heart Region, and when point 2 is pure it is full of peace. Now, when you feel a continuous vibration of peace from a person or a situation in life, what happens? It is very easy to love that person or situation, whereas if they go on creating disturbances or complexities all the time, you become irritated instead.

And that is experienced at point 3, on the upper left side of the chest. Here anger and love are perpetually present. And as love and anger are purified, then at point 4 courage and strength automatically develop, as well as a healthy fear to keep you on track. The experience at point 4 gives rise to the qualities of point 5 at the throat; purity, clarity, and wisdom are associated with this chakra.

This butterfly effect continues to affect the higher points, from point 6 upward in the Mind Region. The Mind Region actually cannot tolerate illusion, so when the mind is disturbed by heaviness and complexity, we lose our humanity, our human traits. That is why the first step in any inner journey is to clean the heart of all the impressions that have formed in our system. Otherwise, it is not possible to tolerate the load of heaviness and, at the same time, continue to proceed on the journey. It would be like climbing Mount Everest with 10 kg of concrete attached to each shoe. The trick is to be courageous, loving, peaceful, and less inviting to desires.





Heartfulness Practices for Points A, B, C, and D


In Heartfulness, we not only observe these points A to D, we also have practices to refine and purify them, as follows:





Preventing Likes and Dislikes at Point C


Everything starts at point C, the strategic point or landing point for samskaras into our system. As we have already discussed, it is our reactions of likes and dislikes that create the first vibration or stir in the field of consciousness. This affects point C, and from there the energy forms an impression.

To prevent impressions from settling at point C, try to maintain a meditative state throughout the day so that the mind is not pulled by likes and dislikes. If this is done, impressions will not affect the field of consciousness. This is one of the most important things we can do for our mental and spiritual health, and it highlights the importance of maintaining a meditative state during the day.



But, sometimes, impressions do form in our system, and when they do we also have the following practices to remove them:





Meditate for Unity on Point A


We meditate on point A to promote a feeling of universal brotherhood, leading to unity among all. This meditation is to be done before the bedtime prayer for five to seven minutes.

For men: Fix your attention on Point A, with the thought that all the women and men of the world are your sisters and brothers. Hold your thought on this while you meditate on Point A, believing this to be true. If practiced wholeheartedly you can see its effect immediately, and this effect will be permanent.

For women: Think that all divine gifts are available to you, and that all men and women of the world think they are brothers and sisters and your thought is one with theirs.



Why are there different practices for men and women? If you introspect on this, you will begin to see that the difference reflects the difference between Yin and Yang, the feminine and masculine polarity or complementarity. When you let this understanding unfold, it will reveal much about why there are two sexes, and how we complement and teach each other.

If this practice were done daily by people around the world, then the idea of one human family would become a reality very quickly. All resentment, jealousy, personal conflicts, worldly conflicts, possessiveness, and greed would evaporate, and unity would prevail. Such a simple, effective tool has been given to us to manage our worldly worries and bring about oneness.





Manage Sensual Desires at Point B


This process is to be done when you wake in the morning, before your morning Meditation; again only for five to seven minutes.

Fix your attention on Point B and imagine that all impurities and heaviness are going out of Point B from the front of the body. Imagine that as this process is going on, the glow of the soul begins to appear from behind.



The second divine emotion is kama, or passion, and we know that it is necessary for procreation so that the human species continues. God was not a fool to create two sexes, but just as celibacy is not the natural state, at the other extreme passion can also get out of hand and end up in sex addiction or perversion. So this creative energy needs to be managed and balanced. For this purpose, the cleaning of point B works as a passion detox or sex detox, balancing this energy so that we are not overwhelmed by sensual desires. Imagine the harmony that would result in human societies if people around the world practiced it daily!

These Heartfulness methods of Point A Meditation and Point B Cleaning have been developed to remove the heavier tendencies in our life. By practicing them daily, you will contribute toward your own purification as well as to the greater good.





Let Go of Guilt at Point D


Guilt is the heaviest of all the impressions we carry, and it bothers us a lot. Our thoughts, feelings, and actions may create guilt, but our inactions may create even worse guilt. Lost opportunities haunt us: “If I had studied a little more, I would have been admitted to college. My career would have been . . . ,” or “If only I had not said something mean to my father before he left for work this morning,” or “If I had been more thoughtful and caring, perhaps my daughter would not have left home.”

Inaction is serious business. Suppose a doctor is making the rounds of a hospital and a lady is vomiting. She says, “I will come back in ten minutes, as I have to see some other patients. Nurse, look after her.” But when the doctor comes back, the patient is dead. Would she sleep that night knowing she could have done something?

When we go to bed at night, the thoughts that come to mind first are often about those things we missed. Sometimes they wake us in the middle of the night. “I forgot my grandmother’s birthday!” or “I promised my daughter we would spend time together this evening, but I was having drinks with my colleagues after work and the time flew by!” Things we don’t do create heavy impressions that turn to guilt. That guilt stays at the deepest levels of our system and is the heaviest and most difficult impression to remove.

To remove guilt, we need a commitment of a very high order and cooperation at every level. We have to face the guilt and expose ourselves, becoming naked from inside. By opening our hearts, we can say to the Lord or to our Guide, “I have created all this. I will not do it again, but please help me remove this.” The important thing is to make a sincere resolve not to repeat the same thought or action again in the future.

The best time to do this is before sleeping at night. When we let go of guilt at this time, imagine the positive effect it will have on our sleep! We do not need to remember all the things we did wrong, because when we open ourselves, the Guide will remove what he has to remove. There will be many such sessions, over which time his help will gradually dissolve the heaviness.



When we meditate with Transmission, guilt will surely surface to be removed. It is precisely because of the work our Guide is doing that these thoughts have come to the surface to leave, so why hide them? There is no point struggling with thoughts. Once we know the mechanism of why thoughts arise in the mind, it becomes much easier to cooperate.

It happens because the Guide is vacuumizing our system; he is pulling all the complexities out. And then he fills the heart with lightness, and with the universal knowledge and the divine wisdom we require to lead a properly balanced life.





Finding Happiness


The German philosopher Schopenhauer once asked the question, “How can we determine whether a man is happy or unhappy?”

He defined true happiness as the complete satisfaction of all desires.

So we could describe the happiness of a person mathematically as:



Say we have ten desires and five are fulfilled, then we have 50 percent happiness. If ten are fulfilled, we have 100 percent happiness. The more desires we have, the harder it will be to fulfill them all, so the less happy we will be. Happiness is inversely related to the number of desires. But what happens when we have no desires at all? The denominator becomes zero. Anything divided by zero is indeterminate, so if we have zero desires, our happiness will be limitless.

In this state of no desires, we do not expect anything, even from ourselves. When we don’t expect anything, we don’t play games or manipulate others. This has an important effect on how we weave our destiny. Think for a moment about how we human beings destroy our inner condition and our humanness: it all starts with desires. When desires are not fulfilled, there is disappointment. Disappointment leads to anger; anger makes us lose our balance; and once we lose our balance, our mental equilibrium, fear develops, so we are destroyed and lose our humanness.

Whatever happens in life, either the results are favorable or not favorable. Generally, when the results are favorable we are happy, and when the results are not favorable we are disturbed. If an action gives good results and it keeps happening, we develop a happy disposition. But what happens to a person who has disappointment after disappointment? That person generally stops trusting.

So how can we be happy under all circumstances, because that is the ultimate happiness. In order to have limitless happiness, limitless bliss, we need to minimize our desires, from more to less. When we are able to make peace with ourselves that way, we will feel, “Whatever happens, I am happy.” Cleaning impressions at the end of each day also helps. We are able to loosen the pull of desires and keep a joyful disposition.

Now, is it possible to lead a life without any desires? No one can live without desires. It is how we associate our desires with emotions that makes the difference. For example, children need to have toys for their development, but that can lead to the desire to have more and more toys. It is okay for a child to play with toys, but when adults are still playing with remote cars or Barbie dolls, it is foolish. Likewise, when young adults desire romance it is okay, but when older people still flirt, then it is counterproductive at many levels—physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual. So even for the same person at different ages, their level of emotional maturity will affect how they manifest desires.

It is perfectly okay to want to marry the right person, to want to succeed in business to support a family, to want to work in a good environment, and to want a good education in a reputed university. If desires can be translated into aspirations, then they are evolutionary. It is when desires drag us down into the whirlpool of multiple desires that heaviness is created in our system. When desires are aspirational it leads to “becoming” and “being,” as opposed to only having and fulfilling desires.

So how do we solve the riddle of living with desires and not letting them affect us? There is no easy answer, but a state of contentment will prevail in us due to our practice. As a result, we are able to have aspirational desires without getting carried away with the pulls and pushes of “haves” and “have nots.” The key lies in arriving at a state of contentment. When there is totality of involvement without ego, pride, or arrogance in whatever we are doing, there is joy and contentment.





Criticism Is Good!


Criticism is a sensitive topic, as most of us don’t like to be criticized, yet without it how would we change and grow? It is not easy to see ourselves as we are, so criticism is like a mirror in which other people are our reflection. Generally, in the process, the other person is also learning; they would not point out our faults if they did not also have something of the same. That is why our faults irritate them so much. They are also in the process of change, so the whole exercise is beneficial to both.

Then there is the constructive criticism of a Guide, which is designed for our evolution. Babuji once said:

If we observe you and highlight what must be corrected in your behavior, we don’t mean to play the bogeyman. A Guide cares about his aspirants; he wants the best for them. If we do not do so for you, who will? Would you accept it of your family, or your friends? We are not judgmental; there lies the difference.

We want to see you all growing, divested from your dregs; our objective is very different. To alleviate your burden, to purify you and refine you in all your perceptions—including the ability to feel us by your side—all this constitutes one of the aspects of spiritual work. We want to make you stronger in the face of tests, more detached from superfluity, this superfluity that can only weigh down your process. We suggest to you positive and constructive attitudes to mold your personality. A spiritual process requires efforts on all the levels.

Following a method, even if it is effective, entails a transformation of your character. It is a desirable whole, an utmost commitment, if you want to achieve the best results. It is a personal choice; we cannot do it for you.



Husbands often get annoyed when their wives point out their faults, and vice versa, but why get annoyed when they are doing our work for us? They are showing us where we need to improve. So why not be thankful instead? And if something is really not justified, then just let it go. The benefits of criticism far outweigh the disadvantages. It is a mature and wise person who graciously accepts criticism.





Excel in Everything You Do


I have often thought that the purpose of life is to excel in everything we do. Whether it is as a leader, a painter, a student or a cleaner, we can excel. In every little task there is the potential for excellence.

Sometimes we hear people say, “I don’t want to excel because my ego will swell. I want to be humble, not full of ego.”

It is good not to be egotistical, but not at the cost of excelling.

Your ego will only inflate when you think or say, “Look at my work. It’s so wonderful. I did it. You are not as good as me.”

It is best not to use the ego to hurt others, but it is well utilized when we can look inside and say, “Let me do better than I did the last time.”

The ego can never be destroyed, nor should it be, as it is one of our vital instruments for evolution when used well. With a true ego, we do not compare ourselves with others. Instead we compare ourselves with our previous performance. Then the utilization of ego is productive.

The same is true of spiritual practice. How did Babuji originally receive all the methods of Meditation with Transmission, Cleaning, Prayer, points A and B, etc.? The content came as a feeling. It had to be like this: the way was shown, and the feelings were there. And then the feelings were translated into words. Babuji put those words on paper and the practices became the method. So when we practice, we are learning to reverse this process. First we read the words, then we follow the method, and eventually, those words will again become the feeling.

And when we come to a level where we do the Cleaning with that feeling, words are no longer necessary. Instead of saying, “All the impurities and complexities are going away,” we start doing the Cleaning directly. But let this evolve naturally; let it come on its own as a result of practicing the words first.

Similarly, with the Prayer, many a time we start to pray and become prayerful, then we dissolve in it. Words are no longer necessary. They are there to create a state of mind, a state of heart, a state of spiritual condition. When we have that, we have transcended words.

Sometimes the same experience happens with Meditation. We don’t even complete the sentence, “The source of Light in my heart . . .” By the time we close our eyes, the Transmission has started and we are lost in it. So that is the beauty of Heartfulness: although the method is there, we have not even completed the words and it starts happening.

When it is like that, we don’t “do” Meditation; it happens to us. With Prayer, a state of prayer starts happening inside us. The conditions also start unfolding within us, one after the other, if we allow them to happen.

In contrast, when people say, “I do my Meditation regularly before sunrise, and as soon as I come home I do Cleaning, I never miss it, and before I go to bed I practice the Prayer, yet still I am not able to feel the difference,” then take it for granted that something is wrong somewhere. Without exception, those people who say they have done everything and yet do not feel, have not done all that has to be done.

So all the suggestions, the processes, and the attitudes must be correctly done. Once we know the method correctly, the next thing is to fix the timing. Even when we only meditate for ten minutes, we can train ourselves to sit at that time every single day and then increase the duration. It is the vacuum that invokes Grace. And what is the vacuum in a seeker’s heart? The vacuum is created by a deep craving and a feeling of centeredness. Do we have that craving? Let Heartfulness be filled with passion, with fervor, and with a lot of love.





Make Good Use of Time


Let’s return to the story of Babuji scratching a water canal on his hand and connect it to this idea of simplifying intentions. How can we remove unnecessary distractions from our lives so that we remain focused on the main purpose? There is another story about this:

In the days before the Mahabharata War, Guru Dronacharya wanted to find out how attentive his pupils were. He kept a toy bird on the branch of a tree and asked them all to take aim to shoot its left eye. Only Arjuna was able to shoot the bird exactly in the center of its left eye. Drona asked each one what they saw. They answered that they saw the tree or the branch or the leaves. Arjuna answered that he saw only the bird’s head and then only its left eye. His single-minded attention helped him to become the best archer of his time.

Many people think they should wait to do meditation later in life, and focus on career, family, etc. while they are young. Some parents are even against their children meditating while they are studying or starting a career, because they think it will take them away from worldly activities. But let me assure you that meditation will help with career, family, and every other aspect of worldly living. My first meditation teacher was married very early in life, and her in-laws were very orthodox. Babuji had introduced her to meditation before she married, but after marriage her in-laws said, “You can’t meditate in the house.” Her husband was against it, so how could she do it? Everybody kept asking her, “What are you doing?” So instead of arguing with them, she would wake up early and do her Heartfulness Meditation under the blanket, pretending to sleep. In the evenings she would go to the toilet to do her Cleaning practice. She managed very well without causing any tension in her family.

When it comes to the spiritual journey, it is especially good to start young, when we have the strength and the stamina. When we are young we have time to read books, to acquire knowledge, to meditate, and to receive Transmission, Grace, and blessings from above. A time will come when the bodily pains of age get in the way. Even in bed we will not have peace, so how will we sit to meditate when we are worried about aches and pains? So it makes sense to achieve what we have to achieve now, instead of postponing it till later in life.

Once Chariji told me, “Make as much money as you like, but spend it wisely.” Actually, when we spend wisely we don’t need so much. In business, does it matter whether we expand operations from ten million to one hundred million dollars if the means we apply are honest and pure? No. There will be no regret and no guilt. We can also share our profits with others, and that opens up our heart. It is not that we make money only for our loved ones and ourselves. When we have the ability to give, we can explore it further.

If our efforts to make money for the sake of our material life are used to support our spiritual efforts, then the spiritual and the material wings of existence will fly together and become integrated. It is a matter of extending the wing of spirituality into material life. Then there is beauty in material proliferation.





Cultivate Humility and Simplicity


We have been exploring how purity weaves destiny, but we have not yet spoken too much about the impurities that can destroy destiny. Think about it: What kinds of moods destroy purity? Anger, hatred, doubt, temptation, fear, guilt, laziness, ego, jealousy, ignorance, judgment, and prejudice.

The first step is to identify our enemies so that we recognize them before they affect us too much. Now, how do we identify our friends? What are the good things that support purity and make it more intense? Love is number one, then patience, tolerance, acceptance, faith, discipline . . . we have a long list of friends.

In the Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna mentions the great qualities we must have in order to tackle the struggles of life. He uses an analogy: Life is like being protected inside a palace in which we live. Imagine that the palace is protected by a wall, with one noble quality protecting each gate of that wall. It is the back gate that is the most vulnerable in a palace, as nobody pays attention to it, and that is the gate of humility, which generally remains unseen because it is so small. It doesn’t call for our attention. It is the place from which most enemies attack, the most unexpected place. Lord Krishna says that this gate must always be protected by humility. If we do not have humility, all the other gates are vulnerable.

In fact, if we have the qualities of humility and simplicity we can consider that we have everything; there is nothing more we need. With humility and heart, there is not only unspoken respect but also nobility. Nobility radiates when we walk or talk, and even when we are not doing anything. There is immense courtesy and civility in conversation. We strive for proper communication and go further into a state of communion: from communication to communion.

It is only when we break the wall of greatness and submit ourselves as humble and insignificant beings, subduing our behavioral complexities and ego, that life will be truly enjoyable. And for that we need to cultivate an attitude of surrender.

Now, who wants to surrender willingly? That is where the ego creates problems. But that is also where we can pamper the ego and make use of its qualities: “I will excel in this art of surrender.” In this, the ego will help, and then we slowly say goodbye to it. Actually, there is nothing wrong in thinking ourselves to be great as long as we always think the other person is greater.





Be Natural and Truthful


Imagine for a moment the beautiful fragrance of a rose. Does the rose need to speak about radiating its fragrance? In a similar way, purity does not have to be spoken about, and love also does not have to be spoken about. Speaking about these things brings them down to a lower level. Qualities radiate naturally.

Yet often our intellect interferes, and we debate internally: “Should I do this or that?” When my inner nature is to emit purity and love all the time, where is the question of limiting myself by saying, “Okay, I should be doing just one thing at this particular time”? It is not natural. It is like those artificial perfume pumps that recognize your presence and emit a burst of fragrance when you pass by. Compare that to the rose.

Here is another simple analogy: Suppose we are on the riverbank relaxing. Suddenly a really silly idea comes: “Let’s count how many waves are passing by.” We then waste time doing that instead of relaxing and taking in the beauty of the surroundings, and as a result, we end up with a headache. Likewise, when we meditate, we can also try to be perfectly natural. There is no need to use any force to become thoughtless or to try to recall the best meditation session that we had previously, or to think, “I must have the lightest condition!” We will only waste time. It is better to be natural, and then we can be immersed in purity. Otherwise, the condition we crave will be given only to satisfy our desire. It will not be natural. There is no need to presuppose anything in meditation or to meditate with the idea that we will be going deeper or to want the experience of a particular state. Be absolutely open. The moment we say, “I would like to feel like this,” we are lost, because we are putting conditions.

Even in mundane human relationships, the moment we put conditions, we no longer have a relationship. For example, imagine saying to your boyfriend, “I will marry you only if you take me to the movies every week.” What sort of a relationship is that? Why put conditions? So it is with God also. Why cheapen the relationship? With God there has to be no condition whatsoever. We just need to be ourselves.

It is often difficult to be completely truthful, even with loved ones, because we worry that they will not love us if we show them our true selves. If we remain artificial, however, we will never have proper relationships with family members and friends, because we will always be trying to impress or please them. There is no need to impress anyone. Whom are we fooling by doing so? Mostly ourselves. It requires a lot more effort to be unnatural. To tell a lie needs effort, because we have to remember it. To lie, we must be creative, whereas to speak the truth we need only be simple. The truth is pure, coming straight from the heart. Truthful people are content in their simplicity and purity. They are not trying to impress anyone, because they know who they are. They are what they are.





Speak with Love


During our wakeful hours, most of our time is spent communicating, and if we pay a little attention to how we speak we can greatly reduce the formation of impressions. I came across something very profound while studying the life and teachings of Lalaji—about how to address others and how to converse. It is one of the most valuable things I have discovered, and it has changed my life.

What does Lalaji say? Let the flow of conversation be a current that is even and in tune with the current of reality. In this way, you will touch the hearts of those listening.

How? Remove all sharpness so that your speech doesn’t carry any kind of weight, like a current of still air. Let it be soft, cultured, smooth, and balanced. A person whose tongue is cultured and polite has a large, pure, and noble heart. Be free of anger and emotional outbursts in speech. The heart is so tender that it begins to wilt even with the slightest disturbance.

To develop such softness, be filled with such a feeling of love that you have no inclination to hurt anybody’s heart, and then your words will not hurt anybody’s heart.

The mistakes we commit during our daily activities arise mainly out of our conversations, because of what we should not have said and the way we spoke. Even the way we don’t speak at times conveys a lot. We can transcend these shortcomings by keeping a continuous watch on ourselves and by connecting ourselves with the Source.

There is a humorous story about this. One day Mulla Nasruddin was asked to judge a dispute between two villagers. After listening to the prosecutor, he responded, “Yes, you are right.”

The man was very happy and thought he had won the case: “You see,” he exclaimed. “I told you so!”

After listening to the defendant, Nasruddin again responded, “Yes, you are right.”

The local sheriff was baffled, and asked, “Your honor, how can they both be right?”

“You are right!” exclaimed Nasruddin.

Even in mundane relationships, it is differences that strengthen us—differences of opinion. You are able to see one perspective; your friend comes and sees another; your mother adds value to this new perspective; your driver might say something else. Through these various perspectives we understand things better. The trick is not to consider them as opposing opinions, or the people as your competitors just because they have different ideas. Different ideas broaden and expand our outlook, our consciousness, so it is much more productive to embrace them. Different ideas will always be there, at work, in the family, everywhere. That is what brings richness to life. With emotional maturity we embrace diversity and learn to integrate all points of view.

There is one other aspect of communication I have learned from my Guides and found to be very beneficial, and that is to be very subtle and indirect. For example, say that you want to correct or criticize a certain habit in another person. Rather than speaking to them directly, it is often better to speak about it generally in a group, even sometimes looking at someone else entirely while speaking about that habit. That way the person can absorb the advice without becoming defensive or reactive.





Eat with Love


The second thing we all do during our waking hours is eat. Through conversation we imbibe and exchange thoughts and feelings; through food we imbibe and exchange energy and nutrients.

The state of mind we have while consuming food is very important. Earlier I mentioned how Dr. Pavlov trained dogs in his behavioral experiments during the 1890s. Pavlov also conducted an experiment with cats. He gave food to cats and measured the digestive juice secreted while they were eating. Then, one time, when the cats had just started eating, he brought in a dog. Seeing the dog, the cats were scared, and their gastric juice output was almost nil. So fear would not allow even a little bit of food to be properly digested. Similarly for us, if we are in a stressful or fearful situation, the vibrations that are negatively carried in the food also affect our bodies when we eat. And when the digested food goes to all the cells, it has a negative effect.

What happens at home when there is a quarrel at the dinner table? Will we digest our food well? When we meet at the dinner table, we often talk about family problems. There is nothing wrong with discussing family problems, but let’s wait for a better moment. Let the moment of eating be like meditation, where we are so grateful to God for the food on our plates. When we consume food in such a state of mind, imagine the spiritual charge of that food! All kinds of spiritual diseases can be cured by this simple act.

There is no need to take my word for it. Observe for yourself. Compare what happens when you eat in a cheerful, grateful mood with what happens when you are stressed or disturbed. Now observe what happens when you are lost in remembrance of your inner Self and you eat with that inner state radiating its fragrance. Also, when you are preparing food, observe the effect of your mood. Be loving. It will have such a beautiful effect.





How to Accept Difficulties


What is the difference between coal and a diamond? Both are carbon. When coal comes under intense pressure and heat, it turns to diamond. Our existence is like that, too, yet often we don’t want to go through the pressure of challenges, even though we know very well that the end result is always good. We talk so fondly of those difficult times: for example, “We walked all the way to the airport.” We even boast about them. Would there be anything to boast about if we had gone in a car? When we really have a tough time and survive with integrity, we can say, “Wow, I did it!” Tough times really do make us stronger.

Challenges in life prepare us for greater things. We have an opportunity to learn from those moments. The best thing to do is to try to solve problems without getting frustrated, because when we get frustrated our minds are disturbed. When the radar is disturbed, there will not be guidance from within, and we will not be able to make the right decisions. So when challenges are there, we have to become extra alert. Instead of fighting them, invite them.

If we learn to accept miseries, we will understand their purpose and what they can do for us. To what level can they take us? All of these things will be lost the moment we avoid or react to struggles. If we go through difficulties peacefully, with a quiet heart, with a bold heart, and with a lot of courage, then we will emerge stronger. If we don’t accept them, we will not learn anything. If we merely accept, we will remain mere human beings. To really transform our destiny, we need more than mere acceptance; we need to accept all situations joyfully and cheerfully and see the beauty that emerges.

This requires courage and self-confidence. If you do not feel confident in yourself, have confidence that your Guide will get you through this. Then you will come out a winner. Even if you fail in a worldly way, you will pass the exam of life with flying colors. If you face life as it comes and move on, with a smile, you will build your destiny. We all go through ordeals and difficulties—no one is an exception, but ordeals accepted cheerfully will bear spiritual fruits. In a way we can say that mastery is a life mastering many things: mastery of pain, mastery of pleasure, mastery of difficulties. Every situation is in our hands, and if we want to go further, we need to go beyond acceptance to cheerful acceptance.

And we can go even further, where we have no idea whether we have accepted with cheerfulness and gratitude; it really does not matter, as we have moved on. That is absolute acceptance, total surrender, and in that state of surrender we are always in the present. We are not anticipating anything different. We do not expect any change from the other.

When we go on anticipating better moments, we can never be happy. When we try to accept and make peace with the world, instead, and make peace with ourselves, then we have mastered our life. Then we will confidently, gracefully, walk through any situation in life without creating impressions, either in ourselves or in anyone else. Our existence does not create ripples anymore. If at all it has any effect, it sends out waves of purity and love.

In spirituality and in life, we are proceeding toward the unknown. So how can we have any expectations about the next step? We cannot. When expectations are dissolved, we accept things completely, and then our heart is content.





Poise


Have you ever had the opportunity to meet a great Guru or saint and observe his or her life? Perhaps you want to become like him or her. When we observe the lifestyles of such great beings, what appeals to us? What are the high, pristine qualities that stand out in their lives?

Let me share with you something about my second Guide, Chariji. There were so many outstanding qualities I observed in him, but the one that struck me most was his poise. He was never in a rush. Even when there were ten people waiting, he would attend to them one by one. When he would conduct group Meditation, he would take his time to finish it well. While giving an individual Meditation session, he would take his time. Whatever task was given to him, he would do it with absolute poise. When he cooked, there was love oozing in his movements. Even when he scolded us, there was poise and a lot of love. There was no element of rushing; he took his time in doing everything so nicely.

Mulla Nasruddin was said to have demonstrated this quality to his followers with his signature humor. One day he was seated on his donkey, rushing through the marketplace. Followers and friends tried to hail him to chat every few meters, but he kept going faster and faster, replying, “I can’t stop to talk now. Can’t you see I am busy? I’m looking for my donkey!”

This captures the human predicament. It is critical to slow down; it is critical to have time for those around us and enjoy the beauties of life; it is critical to become conscious of the search and of ourselves as the seekers. So pause and try to remain poised, especially when everyone is rushing around you and there is pressure. Go into your heart, feel your Center, and recalibrate yourself. Try to approach the task at hand with poise and grace.





Sleep and Natural Rhythms


What are some of the natural cycles that we follow in our lives? To start with, we have a very regular pattern of breathing—inhalation, exhalation—which goes on and on. Another rhythm is that of our heartbeat. Then there is something that happens behind the breathing pattern at a deeper level—the inflow and outflow of energy—and, of course, there is the daily cycle of activity, rest, and sleep. Finally, we will explore how we can be more in tune with the monthly lunar cycle.

Only a healthy body can have a healthy mind and vice versa. A lot of people argue that a healthy mind makes for a healthy body, but without also having a healthy body, our mind will go crazy. “My legs are not working, my hands are not working, and so many other things are not working.” We go to doctors and start worrying. How will we build our destiny when we have already chosen a destructive path, simply by not following the natural rhythms? So it is important to understand these rhythms and be in sync with them.





Breathing


Let’s start with the subject of breathing. Just as each of us has a unique identity related to our iris and fingerprints, our breathing pattern is also unique to us. Not only do we inhale and exhale in a specific rhythmic way, when we examine our breathing further, we discover that our two nostrils also work differently according to the solar and lunar cycles. Take a moment to observe which of your nostrils is breathing more dominantly. Is it the left or the right? Or are they both the same?

In the yogic shastras, great significance is given to both nostrils. The right nostril is associated with the Surya Nadi or Pingala, and also with the sympathetic nervous system, signifying activity. The left nostril is associated with the Chandra Nadi or Ida, and the parasympathetic nervous system, signifying rest and repose. Every couple of hours the pattern can switch, but overall, there is also a very marked difference between day and night. Ideally, the right nostril is predominant during the daytime and the left nostril at night. If you check ten times during the day, you will probably find that eight times out of ten your right nostril is more active than your left, and the opposite happens at night. This physiology is directly related to the movement of both the sun and the moon.

When our balance is disturbed, a switch occurs. For example, what happens when we are angry? It is a sympathetic response, so the right nostril will be strongly activated and dominant. The same happens when we have a lot of fear and anxiety. During the sympathetic response, the hormones adrenaline, cortisol, and norepinephrine are released into the blood, so our heart beats faster and faster; our muscles tense, ready for action; our blood pressure goes up; and we become highly aware. We are ready for “fight or flight.” In order to reverse this, we can use a simple breathing exercise.





Left Nostril Breathing


When you feel yourself getting angry, close your right nostril with your thumb and take a slow, deep breath through your left nostril, breathing deeply into your abdomen and releasing the breath fully each time. Then continue to breathe like this eight to ten times through your left nostril.



I invite you to try this for yourself, and if it helps you can share the knowledge with others. Normally, your heart will stop pounding, you will become calmer, and the emotional



In the olden days, when people could not sleep they would get up and examine their breathing. If their breathing was not as it should be, they would drink hot water, do Pranayama, walk, etc. When we observe our breathing very carefully just around sunrise, we witness a slow shift from left to right, and at sunset a slow shift from right to left. And when we meditate at one of those transition times, it will be wonderful. It is just the right time, because the balance is there between your Surya and Chandra Nadis.

As an experiment, observe yourself at night and during the daytime at random intervals. Is your energy pattern one of absorbing or radiating? At the time of observing your energy inflow or outflow, also observe whether you are breathing through your left or right nostril. You will be able to find a relationship between the inflow and outflow and your breathing pattern. We can all contribute to this research.





Daily Rhythms and Hormones


Early in the morning, before dawn, nature’s energy flows in one direction toward the Source. This is not a physical energy but something much subtler. It is best when we flow with those currents, and this happens when we meditate before dawn. It is wiser to meditate just before sunrise, because very naturally Transmission flows with your natural inflow of cosmic energy at that time. After sunrise, energy is naturally flowing outward, so it is not as easy to absorb Transmission. It also makes sense to do the evening Cleaning at a time when the energy flow is outward, as we are throwing things out from our system. This happens when the Surya Nadi is active, for example, just before sunset.

Our genetic predisposition is geared toward responding to these solar cycles and other natural cycles, based on millions of years of evolution.

During the daytime we are predisposed to a certain pattern of breathing and level of activity. Since time immemorial, our forefathers developed a natural routine of life based on these cycles. Most activities were performed during the daytime, and nighttime was for rest. So the body acquired a rhythm of activity and rest, day and night.

To be in tune with these cycles, our forefathers generally rose early and greeted the sun. For example, in Hatha Yoga we have the Surya Namaskar, the sun salutation, which was often done in the early morning, outside, facing the rising sun. And still today, in some villages in India, you can see people in the early mornings practicing the traditional Hindu ritual of offering water to the sun. Scientists now know that sunlight activates nerve pathways from the retina of the eye to the hypothalamus, which then leads to serotonin production. Serotonin is our “happy” hormone, and without it we are prone to depression. Being out in the sunlight in the early morning kick-starts our serotonin production for the day, giving us that bright, joyful feeling toward life. Sunlight on water also releases negative ions into the atmosphere, vitalizing our system even more. There is great scientific wisdom in many of the ancient rituals!

Not only that, enough serotonin is a prerequisite for the production of another hormone in our bodies called melatonin. Within the pineal gland, serotonin is chemically transformed to yield melatonin. Melatonin levels start increasing in our bodies about two hours before we are programmed to go to sleep, so if we are sensitive enough to feel this natural rhythm we will start to wind down for the day in a restful mood, and then eventually prepare for the night. If, on the other hand, we continue watching TV or playing video games late into the night while our bodies are trying to prepare for sleep, it is like swimming against the current.

This daily hormonal rhythm is an integral rhythm, where one thing leads to another: rising early and being out in the sun leads to serotonin production, which leads to melatonin production, which allows us to sleep well, which allows us to wake up early again the next morning. When this cycle is disturbed, we are prone to sleep problems and depression, two of the most significant maladies of the modern world.





Sleep for Well-Being


This brings us to the importance of sleep. Disciplining our sleep cycle changes our life. How well we sleep and how deeply we sleep determines our state of mind throughout the day. Generally, it is better to sleep early to be in tune with natural cycles. Also, our morning Meditation will improve drastically, as we are not struggling with our consciousness. When we meditate with a well rested mind, we have a good grip over consciousness, whereas when our consciousness is crippled because of lack of sleep, will it be easy to wake up for morning Meditation with a fresh mind?

When we are fully alert in the morning, lovingly we can invite the higher consciousness and be one with that essence. Then some beautiful conditions will be created in the heart. And when they are so intense, they stay glued to us, whether we try to hold on to them or not. If we try to shake them off, they will not go away. Such is the influence or the permanency of the condition created when our consciousness is ready to receive. If our morning Meditation is hampered, as it happens after a bad night’s sleep, the whole day is affected. For someone who has never meditated, or who meditates every now and then, it makes very little difference. It is just another day gone. We can compare that level of consciousness to roaring oceans. They look so dramatic and poems are written about them, but real beauty is when there is a still pond without any waves and there is utter serenity all around.

So the choice is ours. If we choose to lead a life like the roaring ocean, we will be lost in the waves of our disturbed consciousness. Per contra, when our consciousness is still and settled, even the slightest change or variation is noticed, the way the fall of the lightest leaf on a still pool of water creates ripples. They are felt. So sleep matters.

If we get the right amount of sleep, the right nostril will automatically be active in the morning. Over millennia our systems have evolved in such a way that when the sun rises, certain hormonal patterns are triggered. When we are in tune with that rhythm, our health automatically improves.

What happens to people who go to bed very late at night? When we go against the rhythm, again we are swimming against the current, and our decline in health over time will speak volumes. It is better to set a healthy pattern as early as possible in life. Nightly activities are one of the curses of the modern world. Because of electricity, there is now not much difference between the day and the night. Starved sleep patterns result from irregular habits and late nights, and health suffers as a result. Immunity levels also go down because our nervous system is under stress.

Extensive studies have been conducted on people who work at night, and it has been discovered that, among other things, they age rapidly. Unlike those who have to do shift work for their livelihood, most of us do not have to work at night. We have a choice, yet we choose to stay awake late at night, watching all kinds of things. Whether we look at it for spiritual growth or health, if we go to sleep early, it will help us a lot. Remember the wisdom of the old English proverb, “Early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.”

There is an enlightening TED talk by Jeff Illif called “One More Reason to Have a Good Night’s Sleep,” in which he describes how our neurological system detoxifies itself during sleep. Our central nervous system does not have any lymphatic drainage, so the cerebrospinal fluid flows through the space between the cells removing toxins from the brain, and this happens during sleep. In a person whose sleep pattern is normal, this drainage of cerebrospinal fluid is effectively able to remove the toxins, but in sleep-deprived individuals the toxin removal is reduced greatly. These toxins then affect us, so we become vulnerable to bad moods. When we are sleep-deprived, what happens in the morning? We are cranky. We become irritated. So it is not surprising that sleep-deprived individuals are responsible for a large number of road accidents. They also cannot engage themselves in creative discussions and fruitful conversations. They become irritated with every little difference of opinion.

Here are some tips for getting a good night’s sleep:

Rise early in the morning and spend a few minutes out in the sun.

Around sunset, or when you finish your day’s work, do the Heartfulness Cleaning so that you are able to let go of the worries and stresses of the day.

Wind down in the evening for a couple of hours before sleeping, so your brainwaves slow down and you are able to naturally transition into sleep.

At bedtime, first analyze what you could have done better during the day and let go of any wrongs you have done, vowing not to repeat them. Then do the Heartfulness Prayer so you sleep in a deeply open relaxed state, connected to your Center.



If you still have trouble sleeping, try the following:

Wash your feet before going to bed.

Try sleeping on your right side, as it activates the parasympathetic nervous system, helping you calm down.

Imagine gentle, cool water falling from above your head, calming you.

Drink a glass of warm milk.

Do the Heartfulness Relaxation lying down in bed.

Listen to relaxing music. Some music that is particularly good for sleeping can be found at www.heartfulness.org/goodnightsleep.





When we want to excel in life, we will find a way to naturalize our sleep patterns. Otherwise we struggle with that one fundamental thing all our lives. We have neither the proper consciousness for everyday activities nor a proper spiritual condition. We uproot our consciousness, the very guiding force, and so we leave ourselves vulnerable to greater emotionality and reactivity. More and more, we collect impressions throughout the day. Then our ability to remove those impressions through Cleaning suffers, so Meditation suffers, and it becomes a vicious cycle.

If instead we have a fine condition, a pure condition, a blissful condition, we will feel lightness and gratitude. This gratitude emerging from the heart creates a bond between God and us. There is great benefit in it, and as we receive more and more benefit, we feel like doing more and more.





Lunar Cycles and Fasting


Our bodies are composed of 60 to 70 percent water, so the moon has a significant effect on our being. Just as you see the impact of the gravitational pull of the moon on the water in the oceans—the tidal range is over fifty feet in some places—similarly, the moon has an impact on the water in our bodies, and the “Lunar Effect” has been observed in many other species of plants and animals.

The term “lunatic” actually comes from the lunar effect on the human system, and especially during the full moon, records show that criminal activity is greater than usual. The ancients in India must have observed this, because they noted that from the 8th day of the lunar cycle, the effect of the gravitational pull of the moon starts increasing and reaches its peak on the 14th day. Midway between these two is the 11th day, which they called Ekadashi, which is Sanskrit for the number 11. There are two Ekadashi days in each month: one in the first half of the month when the moon is waxing, and the second when the moon is waning. These days have a special significance for health, and many people fast on these days. The practice was also connected with religion so that people followed this ritual for their health and well-being. Our forefathers discovered that when we moderate our intake of food on the Ekadashi days, we moderate the gravitational impact of the moon on our system.

The concept of fasting to balance the system also ties in with the fascinating work done by Dr. Yoshinori Ohsumi on autophagy, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 2016. Autophagy is our body’s internal recycling program and is the process by which the body consumes and recycles its own damaged cells and unused proteins. This happens more effectively when we fast. After an infection, autophagy eliminates those cells that have been infected by bacteria and viruses. Interestingly, in many traditions there is the saying, “Starve a cold.” I believe our ancients observed these correlations across the physical, emotional, and mental spectrum, and thus started the ritual of fasting on certain days. So a sensible hypothesis is that autophagy has a role to play in our emotional and mental well-being, beyond just the physical benefits, and more research needs to be done to verify this.

One of the most important principles in life is to be in tune with nature. We can swim with the river’s flow, or we can swim against the flow—but what do we get by resisting?





Radiation


Electromagnetic technology is an integral part of most of our lives. Manmade sources of electromagnetic radiation in our environment include Wi-Fi, Internet, Bluetooth, mobile phones, computers, tablets, microwave ovens, and medical equipment. Today we are starting to learn more about its long-term effects. In May 2011, WHO’s International Agency for Research on Cancer announced it was classifying electromagnetic fields as “possibly carcinogenic to humans” and advised everyone to adopt safety measures to reduce exposure.

There is now a field of research known as bioelectromagnetics. Authorities in Sweden, Austria, Germany, and France, among other countries, recommend their citizens do the following:



Use hands-free electronic devices to decrease radiation to the head

Keep the mobile phone away from the body

Do not use a phone in a car without an external antenna.





How do electromagnetic fields (EMFs) affect our biology and health? Our subtle body is our energetic body, which has its own electromagnetic field created by the negative and positive polarity of charge. As a result, the subtle body is affected by other energy fields in the environment—for example, the buildup of positive ions in the atmosphere before a thunderstorm creates restlessness, while the release of negative ions once the storm arrives brings relief.

In nature, everything is in a state of dynamic balance or equilibrium, with complementary energy flows switching just like alternating currents throughout any given day. The same sort of alternating pattern is seen in the complementary sympathetic and parasympathetic currents associated with the Surya and Chandra Nadis, where at times one predominates, then the current switches so that the other predominates. Then there are the main inflection points at sunrise and sunset, the stationary points, where the turn of the flow is more prominent, like the turning of the tide. We see these patterns of polarity at the macrocosmic and microcosmic levels, whether in the planetary movements or in particles at the atomic movement.

What happens when we add man-made EMFs to the environment? They interact with our natural EMFs. So the stronger the wireless technologies in our city environments, the more they are likely to affect us. Some people are sensitive, and get headaches, rashes, nausea, and nervous complaints. The evidence is still inconclusive on whether EMFs cause these symptoms, but the effects will happen first at the level of the subtle body, the energy field, and will eventually filter down to have a physical effect. In fact, most diseases start in the subtle body as an imbalance or disturbance, which is why Traditional Chinese Medicine works on the meridians and Ayurveda on the nadis and chakras. Just because we don’t measure a physical effect, it does not mean that nothing is happening at more subtle levels.

A few years back, a group of girls in Denmark did an experiment at school. One of them said, “We all think we have experienced difficulty concentrating in school. And if we had slept with the phone next to our head, we sometimes also experienced difficulty sleeping.” They took 400 watercress seeds and placed them in twelve trays: six in a room without radiation, and six in the next room with two Wi-Fi routers. The seeds were given the same amount of water and the same conditions of light. After twelve days the cress seeds next to the router did not grow so well, and some of them mutated and died.

The experiment drew international attention, and scientists replicated it with double-blind controls and other experimental variables, such as using other plants. Here is an example using mung bean seeds in seed trays in four different environments. Try it for yourself and see what happens.



One of the Danish students said after finishing their experiment, “None of us sleep with our phones next to our beds anymore. Either the phone is put far away, or it is put in another room. And the computer is always off.”

Here are a few simple things that will also make a difference:



Turn off the Wi-Fi when it is not in use, including at night.

Use a mobile phone in the car only when necessary, and don’t charge the phone in the car.

Keep your mobile phone in a bag, not in a pocket on your body.

Switch Bluetooth on only when needed.

Keep your phone away from the bed when you sleep.

Avoid giving small children phones to play with like toys.





These technologies have brought us many benefits, not the least of which is the fact that people across the globe can connect so easily, families can stay in touch, and businesses can thrive. They have revolutionized our global network. But they have significant downsides, and today many of us are dependent on these technologies to the point of addiction. The radiation accompanying these devices may well be harmful to health because of its effect on our subtle body, our consciousness, and only time will tell the long-term effects of constant use.

Today we look back at the Romans and wonder why they were so foolish as to use lead utensils for cooking, resulting in lead poisoning. Will the people of the 23rd century look back at us with the same incredulity for our rampant and unregulated use of these digital technologies?





CHAPTER 10



TRANSFORM YOUR RELATIONSHIPS





IF YOU ASK most people in their twenties today about what is on their mind, they will say relationships and career. It may also be the same if you ask people in their thirties and forties. Relationships matter because we live in families, communities, cities, and nations. By nature we are social creatures, and conflict in any of our important relationships can tear us apart. Yet how many of us can say that we know how to nurture healthy, happy, positive relationships? Here are just a few of the things I have learned over the years about relationships.





Respect


Mutual trust and respect is a fine quality to have in relationships, but often we are more concerned with self-respect, expecting others to respect us rather than making an effort to respect them. I do not have a lot of respect for self-respect, as it is usually childish, and not really helpful for our growth. But let’s consider a higher approach toward the subject. Here is what two of the Guides of our Heartfulness tradition have had to say about self-respect:

Babuji: “Self-respect, as I understand it, means that one should not do unto others as one would not like others to do unto oneself.”

Lalaji: “Everyone should remain reserved with one another. One should not give opportunity for too much talking—that is, do not give a long rope for discussion. One should not reveal one’s household secrets to all and sundry. One should not consider oneself as weak. One should not utter anything that may drive others to become unmannerly toward you. All of this constitutes the definition of self-respect.”



Now let’s concern ourselves with respect for others. It is actually the epitome of love for yourself. If you do not love yourself, this very fine quality can never develop inside you.

Take a situation where you felt angry because you did something that made you unhappy with yourself. Can you respect others at that time? It is not possible. Now contrast that with how you behave when you are in a state of love. Even when an enemy comes before you, because of the way you behave, he will feel, “Look! He is treating me so well.” He then goes back changed.

Respect for others is expressed in many ways. If you were invited to visit a dignitary, for example, would you wear shorts? No, because you want to show respect to the person. The principle here is not that we want to look good, but that we want to make an extra effort when visiting someone of a certain stature. When we wear a tie to the office because guests are visiting, we do it as a mark of respect for them. It is not that we want to show off. It is precisely to show respect toward others that we dress in a certain fashion.

Similarly, the way we speak, the way we sit, and the way we hold our head conveys something to the people we are meeting. When we slouch in front of guests, it is not respectful. Though we may not speak a word, our behavior says it all. When we express ourselves without sincerity or feeling, our looks and manner convey it.

Some people walk into a room as if they have created a storm, banging doors and stirring up an agitation. The way they walk, talk, and look around speaks volumes. They carry an atmosphere of disrespect, because they do not have love for others. They do not have respect for others.

Also, what about our relationships with children? We often take children for granted and fool around with them, thinking they are unimportant. Compare this with Babuji’s relationships with little children. He would say “Aap,” meaning “Thou,” because he had so much respect for the young ones.

I have seen that when we address a child with a lot of respect, we invoke the same quality in that little fellow who is trying to come up in this world and grow. But if we keep telling him, “You stupid fellow, sit down, you should not be doing that, behave yourself,” all the time lecturing and joking and putting him in a corner, he will learn to behave in the same way. Thus, from a very early age, the idea of respect is foreign to him. If children do not know what respect is, it is because elders do not respect them.

So when a small child has an idea, like, “Oh, this flower is beautiful,” praise her by saying, “Yes! It is such a wonderful flower; you are right.” Guide her to do more research. “How many petals are there? What is the color? How do you like its fragrance?” Help her develop her analytical abilities. When we start from scratch, we will see where it can go.





Love


I would like to explore the topic of love, starting with a scientific concept. What is entropy? Let’s understand it with a practical example. Say you bring a book home from the library, your father gives you another book as a gift, your girlfriend gives you magazines, and you have a collection of music CDs. They all pile up on a small table in your room, so now there is clutter. The rest of your room is also in a disorganized state: your clothes are scattered on the floor, your socks are under the bed, and your towel is hanging on a chair. This is a disintegrated system, and it is chaotic.

Eventually you become frustrated with the mess and clean everything up. You put each book on the shelf where it belongs, wash your laundry, and make your bed. Now the room looks clean, until again you start scattering more books and other stuff, and again the system disintegrates. To keep things in order requires constant energy input.

Entropy is the degree of disorder or randomness in any system. The second law of thermodynamics says that entropy increases over time. It reflects the instability of a system over a period of time if there is no energy input to keep it stable.

Our human relationships can also become unstable because of the disorder that develops from the interactions we have day after day. We let things build up inside. We store more and more emotions and reactions, creating inner disorganization, just like the books and clothes in the bedroom. We harbor resentments and irritation, until one day we explode—unless we do something about it. We need inputs to stabilize relationships and iron out the wrinkles or differences so that we do not harbor and store things forever in our minds.

What is the input that is required? Is it that we have to give constant external input to keep our relationships stable? Do we have to offer ice cream and candy to pacify the other person every time we make a mistake? This would mean constant investment to maintain a relationship. When constant input is required every time there is a fight or an argument, it will require greater input each time. At the same time, it is our business to love each other, whatever the cost. We may get hurt in the process, and there will be a lot of energy invested from our side, but if we are prepared for it, the relationship will improve.

How does this play out in daily life? In a family, if we have to tolerate each other it means that constant input is required, and that is not ideal. In fact, it means that it is not a loving family, even though we may be together. Contrast that with a family where there is love and acceptance among all, where we do not have to offer ice cream or a paradise vacation to patch things up, where it is taken for granted that we accept each other with love. So it is the love we have in our hearts that is the input that stabilizes relationships. With love there is a greater level of acceptance. By acceptance I don’t mean tolerance. Tolerance may be a virtue, but when we have to tolerate someone’s mistakes, we do not have that level of acceptance that comes with love. Love irons out everything. And where does love come from? It comes from a pure heart, from a genuine heart. Distrust kills relationships, whereas when there is love, acceptance, and purity, sacrifice is natural and we are able to let go of everything.

So this principle of entropy helps us to understand the importance of love in relationships. When the constant state of our being is love, then the need for inputs disappears: zero input is needed. When zero input is needed, it means that it is the most stable relationship, the most stable family. There is no need to explain anything, because where there is love there is no need for explanations.

In the case of true love, what happens? Love begins, and the hearts of both people expand. You accommodate anything and everything about one another. Even the mistakes of the other are so adorable, and you do not fight. Then the next stage comes. When you really start loving, you start losing yourself. You start merging with the other person, and you want to do everything to make the other person happy. You don’t worry about yourself at that time.

So why do love marriages fail? It happens when the reciprocation is not equal. The degree now starts varying, and you start judging and thinking, “I should not have done this.” You start retracting because you do not want to lose yourself completely. You are afraid, and that fear arises out of the ego. You have now started remembering yourself, and the relationship goes haywire. You become aware of your own needs, whereas earlier you were not aware of them. You wanted to do anything and everything for the other person. Now you start realizing, “What has happened to me? I was a great doctor, but now I am sacrificing so much.” And then the relationship fails. The moment the idea of “I have sacrificed” arises, it is the end of the love story.

So should we not think about ourselves at all when we are in love? Of course we still need to focus on our own continuous improvement even when we are in love. This is just a cautionary tale: if you find yourself resenting the other person, or noticing how much you are sacrificing for the other, then know that your ego is raising its head and you need to take note. Our personal continuous improvement, on the other hand, is not egotistical in nature, but is a gradual process of rising above self-centered responses, having less concern with personal desires, and becoming more accepting. It actually helps us to be in a state of love and resonance with others. If you reflect on this in relation to your daily actions and thoughts, it will become clear.





Acceptance


Many young people ask me, “What is the most important factor in choosing a life partner?”

I can only say, “Use your heart. And from whatever I have seen so far, the little of life I have lived, I would say do not expect too much.”

Life is all about acceptance. And when we learn the art of accepting whatever comes, whether it is a situation, a business outcome, or a partner, it is the acceptance that makes it successful. Even bacteria mutate to survive in a hostile atmosphere, so why can’t we? We have to learn to constantly adapt to situations without being so disturbed. There is no perfect human being. We are colliding against each other with our imperfections. If we are seeking perfection, we have to question ourselves first: Am I perfect?

Many people want to know if horoscopes are important in determining the right partner. Perhaps the best way to answer this question is to share the example of Lord Rama from the Ramayana. All the rishis checked, double checked, and triple checked the horoscopes at the time of his marriage to Sita, yet Rama had to struggle for fourteen years with his wife, making her go through difficult tests. She had to endure an ordeal of fire after her abduction by the demon king Ravana. What sort of a husband was he?

Sita boldly suffered everything. As Swami Vivekananda put it, there has been no woman like Sita on this planet and there shall never be. Even the most chaste, pure woman was questioned, not by an ordinary man but by a divine incarnation. So it is better not to expect too much. When we are able to accept what life throws at us, we can move on happily. Even the most perfect match can be disastrous, because we do not know what previous samskaras will surface when, and what new samskaras are forming now.

Our responses to life are very complex, and they become all the more obvious when we ask ourselves two questions: “How well do we accept our own faults?” and “How well do we accept the faults of others and the circumstances around us?” It is worth pondering over our responses deeply, because if we keep accepting everything, what is the point in continuous improvement toward perfection? “I accept my imperfections. I am so happy and I am at peace. I don’t have to change.” Is that sort of acceptance useful?

You probably know the joke where the husband comes home rushing to his wife and says, “Papa and Mummy are coming this evening.” He gives this news to her with so much joy, but his wife starts grumbling, “Not again! Why do they keep coming so often?” The husband just keeps quiet. Then, in the evening, the doorbell rings, and she sees her own parents standing outside! She is so happy. What happened to acceptance there?

We accept certain situations with so much joy and have aversion to others. It is when our hearts become small that acceptance bids goodbye. We easily accept people and their idiosyncrasies when they are our own. When they are not our own, it is a different matter. But spirituality says something else. So please think about it. Whenever any situation in your family, your business or your work environment demands a certain level of acceptance, see how far you can go. Keep thinking.

If acceptance is done out of habit, or is enforced, then we are performing another ritual in a refined way. For example, “I must accept this, otherwise I am going against the philosophy of Heartfulness” is not a useful thought, especially if the heart says otherwise. We need to accept situations in life with full alertness and full awareness. There is no point blindly saying that we have to accept something because someone else says so. Then it will not be true acceptance.

I would like to share with you a personal story about acceptance. It happened after Babuji’s passing on April 19, 1983. Sometime on the 18th, while I was working in a pharmacy in New York, I felt as if my whole body was deflating. The energy was just leaving me. So I told my boss that I needed to go home, as I couldn’t work anymore that day.

In the middle of the night I got a call from a family friend in South Africa with the news, “Boy, our Babuji is gone.” Two days later, I took a flight to Shahjahanpur and, by the time I reached there, he had been cremated. Nevertheless, I had the opportunity to collect his holy ashes, put them in an urn, and keep it in his cottage.

At that time Chariji was announced as Babuji’s successor, but in my heart I felt, “How can anyone succeed such a great personality?” I promised myself, “I cannot let Chariji live peacefully; I will act.”

So with this attitude I hired an Ambassador car and, along with three others, set off for Fatehgarh, where I wanted to pay my respect to Lalaji and take an oath that, come what may, I would not let Chariji succeed.

On the way, just as we were discussing all of this most vehemently, for no rhyme or reason our car toppled sideways and fell into a ditch. Fortunately it was a dry ditch and the local villagers turned the vehicle back upright and lifted it onto the road again. But it was not drivable, so we took a bus back to Shahjahanpur. This gave me a jolt: “There must be something wrong in your thinking. Hold your horses! Don’t be too emotionally carried away. Start praying.”

So I started praying to Babuji, and dream after dream led me to the realization that Chariji was his successor. But the dreams only started appearing the moment I became neutral, when I was neither against nor in favor of the decision. I think that this is the prerequisite for taking the next step: we neither accept nor do we not accept. I had come to a neutral midpoint.

I think that this is a good first step in any such situation; only when we come to a midpoint is there the possibility of a solution. If I had remained adamant in my belief that nobody could replace Babuji, I would have lost. By coming to the midpoint there was the possibility of higher forces working upon me so that I was guided correctly.

So the number one step in acceptance is letting go of the possibility that this is so or that is not so, in order to come to a neutral midpoint. Whenever you want guidance from nature or from God or from your Guide, allow yourself to come to that neutral point and then see how you are steered in the right direction.

When we come to neutrality, it is as if a burden is lifted. Whether in family life or in business, before making a final decision, come to a neutral point and see whether you should accept or reject whatever it is. When we arrive at neutrality, we let go of our prejudices and preconceptions. Prejudices make our decisions one-sided, whereas when we are neutral, we are able to see with a clear vision. With neutrality, confidence is emboldened. When the direction is right, the heart feels lighter. There are two questions about acceptance that are really worth reflecting upon:

What is the difference between expectation and hope?

How can we balance acceptance and responsibility? In other words, when does acceptance become irresponsible?





Collective Destiny


My young associates are quite idealistic and passionate about social change. They often ask if we should be contributing more to nation building and social causes, instead of focusing so much on self-development. But suppose we want to change the entire population of New York City and we have the ability to do so, but we do not change. How will that work? Generosity begins at home, with ourselves, by equipping ourselves so we can help others. We need a million dollars in order to give someone else a few hundred thousand. If we do not have money, but we are still hoping to give someone a million dollars, it is a pompous act. We will rob one person to give it to another.

Similarly, when we do not have peace of mind, how can we offer peace to others? There are some teachers who create a disturbance the moment they enter a classroom, and there are others who inspire us and we just want to be around them. There are also certain friends whose association you like because of the person they are.

We are moving toward perfection. Perfection in what? Not in our outer appearance or other external matters. It is the perfection in our inner balance, our inner flawless character and manners. In 1957, Babuji addressed a letter to the United Nations on how to bring about world peace, highlighting a method to uplift the entire universe. He suggested that everyone sit daily at a fixed hour with the thought that “All people of the world are growing peace loving and pious.” Our state of balance, our inner condition, has an effect beyond the immediate environment as we progress. Its impact is galactic in scale.

So what can we do to change the world? First, at the very least, let’s not make the world any worse. When we do our own practice of Cleaning, we are not only removing impressions for our own sake, but we are contributing to the harmony of the home, of the neighborhood, and eventually, of our whole network. Many of us have had the experience that when we wake up early and complete meditation, our children wake up happy and smiling, whereas the day we skip meditation, our children are affected. Our meditation has a definite and immediate impact, changing the vibratory level of the surroundings, and innocent children are very sensitive to these changes. When they are used to “good” vibrations, they miss them when they are not there.

Think about the impact of thoughts on the atmosphere around us. What is the atmosphere like in a jail? That atmosphere is created by the collective thought patterns of the inmates. What is the atmosphere like in a hospital? That atmosphere develops because of the state of mind and consciousness of all the patients and their loved ones. Any collective thought-form or vibration created by a group is called an egregore. The egregore in a church, a temple, or a meditation hall is one of piety, unless of course people are thinking about their problems and worries instead of meditating or praying. Every place has a different vibration, and we create that atmosphere through our collective thought patterns.

Say you are happy, for example, and you try to represent that feeling of happiness on a graph, it will be like a wave pattern. If you come together with another person who is also happy, the wave pattern they create will likely join with yours and have a potentiating effect. As many happy wave patterns come together, the curve will only heighten. This is how an egregore forms, of similar feelings and thought patterns.

Normally we are not aware of how we actively create an egregore, as it happens without us even having to try, simply due to the collective thought energy we create. That is how we change the outside environment. It happens automatically. Wherever the rose goes, the fragrance goes. Wherever we go, whatever we carry goes with us. If I am foolish, my foolishness will go with me. If I am a joker, my joking habit will follow me around and people will laugh at me. That is the impact of the traits that we carry with us on the external environment.

So imagine what we can do if together we purify our consciousness so as to contribute to an enlightened egregore! We are all connected intellectually, morally, and spiritually. Even criminals are so well connected it would surprise you. The black marketeer in Assam knows how much tea he has to stock in the warehouse, and when he releases that information to somebody in South India or to somebody in Dubai, they do a deal. They are connected for profit. The members of terrorist organizations are also well connected. The mafia members respect each other so much they share data: “I got a contract with this labor union. You go to this department and finalize the deal. That is your part.”

So what about spiritual people? Are we so well connected and supportive of each other? It does not really require active input from our side. We just have to let things happen without interfering in the process. This connection will automatically happen once we start purifying ourselves. We will then feel that what we create within ourselves merges with the collective feeling, and we will become a part of the entire scheme of things.

That is why Babuji invited us to help raise the vibration of the egregore. How? By purifying ourselves through practice. When we do this, we become ready for the transformation that will bring change to humanity, and that will also be passed on to the next generation. It is the vibratory level that is preparing this change. The extent to which we have purified ourselves is the extent to which we will contribute to the future course of humanity. So our inner preparation has a great effect, a great echo into the future. The egregore that we prepare, the field that we prepare, has its impact. By meditating regularly and well, wherever we are, together or alone, the impact will be felt beyond our immediate environment, and will benefit all of humanity.

Our power is no less than Godly power, because at the very root of our mind that original stir that happened at the time of creation still continues to work. For example, when Lord Krishna approached Duryodhana just before the beginning of the Mahabharata War, he tried to convince him not to go ahead with his plans to wage war. And Duryodhana told him, “Look, Krishna, I know who you are. I know your abilities. I know I may lose also in the process. I know what is good.” He continued, “I know what is my duty, I know what I have to do, but I cannot compel myself to act in that direction. I also know what I must not do, yet I cannot stay away from it.”

Sometimes we are like Duryodhana. We know what is right, but often we convince ourselves that we are helpless: “I cannot do this. I know it is right, but I cannot,” or “I know what I must not do, yet I end up doing it.” Even when we pray to a Guide who has the great capacity for Transmission, it does not work. Why? Because we prevent it. Our thought force is so powerful that even the great Guides fail in their efforts to change us. Nobody can be changed unwillingly. We must participate in this process of change willingly and joyfully. Deep down, we need to know, do we really want it? We must have the desire for it.





CHAPTER 11



DESTINY





BABUJI GAVE A beautiful message to some of his associates in 1982.2 In fact, it inspired this book.

We are all brethren connected intellectually, morally and spiritually—the main goal of human life. This and that have gone now. There remains the purity alone in all His work and environment which weaves the spiritual destiny of the Being with the Ultimate.



He gives us an inkling of the goal of life: our spiritual connection. “This and that” refers to duality, to the opposites of material existence—good and bad, right and wrong, dark and light, etc. So we eventually go beyond the opposites; we transcend the dualities of worldly existence when we cross the Heart Region and enter the Mind Region, where purity starts dawning more often.

In his books, Babuji described three broad regions of the mind: the Heart Region, the Mind Region, and the Central Region.3 Within the Mind Region there are also five main regions—the Cosmic Region, the Supra-Cosmic Region, the Region of Surrender, the Region of Transition Between Surrender and Oneness, and the Region of Oneness with God. So in total there are seven regions. To describe each of these properly would take longer than is possible in the scope of this book, so here let’s just say that the Heart Region covers the sphere of our material existence and consciousness in the physical world. The Mind Region is the realm of potentiality that supports consciousness, the state before things are manifested in the physical world. The Central Region is the realm of “Nothingness” or vacuum that exists at the center of every atom and also at the center of our own existence, which supports our whole existence. Think of matter versus energy versus space from physics and it will give an idea of these three states of being. Matter is the heaviest, energy is lighter, and space is the subtlest of the three.

The description of these regions is a whole philosophy in itself, which you can read about in Babuji’s book, Efficacy of Raja Yoga4. But for our purposes here, in the light of destiny, it is important to know that as human beings, we are made up of all three regions. Also, we have the potential to realize all of them. Our destiny is by no means only tied to the physical plane of existence; in fact, it is very much dependent on all three regions, and our Heartfulness practices are designed to take us on the journey across all three realms.



When we evolve through a spiritual practice, we continue to live in the physical world until our time is up, but we also develop our capacities in the other two regions or realms of our existence. Because we nurture our subtle and causal bodies, we are able to soar into dimensions other than the physical realm—into the cosmic realm and beyond.

Here is a simple experiment: take a glass cup or measuring cylinder and fill it up with dirty water. Let the dirt slowly settle, and as time passes, you will see how the densest material goes to the bottom and purer water remains on top, except for some floating objects. Likewise, the samskaric “dirt” is mostly to be found in the Heart Region, because impressions are formed in our physical existence. When we expand beyond the limits of this physical realm, we find more and more purity.

As we soar higher, traveling through expanded, refined consciousness, we experience more and more of that purity that weaves our destiny with the Ultimate. At a human level, our aim is to establish this connection. When we do establish it, we get a taste of Divinity and start to mold our lifestyle so as to match the finer levels of subtlety, as we have discussed at length in the section on Lifestyle in this book. Through this process we weave our destiny with the Ultimate.

What is this destiny with the Ultimate? It is not just our destiny in the physical world in which we live our daily lives. In the worldly sense, we want a good life: a happy family, a beautiful house, adequate material goods, a successful career, and making a useful contribution to humanity. All of those things are important, but they relate to our growth in this physical world, and they cannot come with us after we die, to the hereafter, to any other dimension. In order to have a fulfilling destiny with the Ultimate, we also have to pay attention to developing those inner qualities that prepare us for our journey into the hereafter, because our causal and subtle bodies continue on to other dimensions after we leave this physical body. That preparation cannot happen only in old age or at the moment of death; it is built up gradually throughout a lifetime, in parallel with worldly existence.

Babuji used a beautiful word in his message: “weaving.” Weaving creates a fabric from separate strands. He is speaking about the joining together of different elements, and in the terminology of many spiritual traditions and religions this is known as “mergence,” or laya avastha. This is another way of describing the osmosis mentioned earlier in the book.

Our higher spiritual destiny has everything to do with the purification of the subtle body. We do this by removing the layers of impressions that surround it so it can merge with the Source (described in the chapter on Heartfulness Cleaning in the Practice section). These layers form a covering that can be compared to a coating of oil on water. If a water droplet is coated with oil, it cannot merge with the ocean, because water and oil do not mix. That oil-coated droplet of water will float on the ocean’s surface for millennia. We may remember God all our lives, but if this oil coating of samskaras remains, we will never merge with the Ultimate. That is the reason why we go on removing layer after layer of samskaras in order to reach the destination.





CHAPTER 12



THE MEANING OF EXPERIENCES





THIS JOURNEY THROUGH the Heart Region, the Mind Region, and the Central Region takes us across thirteen points, or chakras:

to deeper and deeper levels within the heart,

across the full spectrum of consciousness,

and beyond consciousness to potentiality to absolute nothingness.



The simplest way to try to understand “consciousness, potentiality and nothingness” is to relate them to “body, mind, and soul.” Consciousness is associated with our physical existence, the Heart Region; potentiality is associated with the Mind Region; and nothingness is associated with the causal body, the soul, the Central Region. Consciousness arises out of potentiality, and potentiality arises out of nothingness. God is omnipresent, so exists in all three, although the Absolute nothingness is the ultimate realm of God.

In reality this journey never ends, and each point is an infinite universe in itself. This can be known by experience. The first point, the second point, and so on up to the thirteenth, are all infinite in their expansion. We could continue meditating on the first point of the heart infinitely, life after life after life—that would be horizontal growth. In our spiritual journey, another kind of growth is involved, which we call vertical growth.

After some expansion at the first point, we move to the second. There again, there is infinity. We can easily be lost in the infinite potential of the second point, but a Guide of caliber pushes us to the next level, the third point. It goes on and on like this until we reach the thirteenth point.

Once a person asked Babuji, “Can you show me God, or, at least, tell me what God is all about, this original state?”

Chariji was with Babuji at the time and he thought, “This old man may be caught out today! What will he answer?”

Babuji said, “Suppose I showed you God, how would you know it was God?”

So the question is: How do you experience it?

Remain open to whatever you receive.

How do you keep yourself open?

Do thorough Cleaning and expand your consciousness to receive Transmission.

What can you do in order to receive Transmission?

The best way is to meditate so that you prepare yourself little by little, and in the process you will experience inner states and conditions.

By experiencing these things you will also become something. It is not enough just to have experiences; you must also change and become something—and this is the process of designing your destiny.

Suppose we didn’t ever experience anything in Heartfulness. Would any of us keep meditating? Probably not. Does that mean that these experiences are just carrots, given to us only so that we continue? No. Experiences have another purpose. If we were to experience the entirety of spirituality or infinity in one go, none of us would survive till the next moment. It would be like going to the gym and being asked to lift a 1,000 kg —could you do it? Suppose somebody helps you to lift 1,000 kg but then leaves you holding the weights. That is what would happen to us if the Guide became so generous as to give us such an electrifying experience all in one go. We would be finished.

So instead we start building up with a 5-kg weight, a 10-kg weight and then a 15-kg weight. Slowly, we start enduring the physical stress. In the same way, we start facing the ultimate peace within, experience by experience.

You might have observed that some meditators go straight into a sleep-like absorbed state of Samadhi when meditating, and they may even start snoring. It indicates a weak consciousness in some way. You must have heard of drug users who are gone with the first dose, knocked out all night, but after some time they take five doses, still stand on their feet, and even attend classes or the office. I have seen it in my pharmacy practice. There is a drug called diazepam, which is a sleeping pill. If you take 2.5 mg, you will not be able to stand up; you will go to sleep. But I knew a pharmacist who would take a 20-mg tablet and still work. He was addicted to it, and his system was used to it.

It is similar with these doses of purity, sanctity, simplicity, and divinity—we don’t need to become highly evolved beings overnight. We want to expand our consciousness slowly. Step-by-step we cross the great distance so that we are able to adjust to each new environment as we journey on.

At the beginning we have many experiences. We are impressed by the lightness we feel during meditation sessions with a Heartfulness trainer, because we are experiencing such profound things and it is so amazing. Even if we do not feel anything during a meditation, the aftereffect takes us by surprise as the experience unfolds. In fact, often we will feel more afterward than during a session, as the meditative state is absorbed throughout our system. Later on, as we progress more and more, we still have experiences, but they are of a different nature. They are spiritual in nature, so they are not so dramatic and impressive. As we go higher, there will be fewer and fewer experiences, and when we reach the Central Region, there will be no experience. It is so super fine and without qualities; it is like a desert wasteland.

Upon reaching that state, Babuji complained to Lalaji, “What to do now? My earlier days were a lot better. This feels like nothing. I don’t find any enjoyment with this condition.”

So Lalaji asked him, “Should I remove this condition, since you don’t like it?”

Babuji said, “No, my Lord, please don’t do such a thing. If you do that, this will be my last breath. I won’t be able to survive.”

Although there is no beauty or attraction, it is such a state that you cannot exist anymore without it. That is what we are aiming for: the purification of consciousness to its highest state.





CHAPTER 13



EVOLUTION





EVOLUTION IS MY favorite topic. It is actually a much bigger topic than most people imagine, when we include the three bodies of a human being—the physical, subtle, and causal bodies. What do we really understand by evolution? If you ask around, most people will say that evolution is all about change. But what evolves in human evolution, and how are destiny and evolution intertwined?

Let’s start with what is familiar. We learned about biological evolution at school: all the theories about morphological change, cellular change, and genetic change. It is only due to more recent research in epigenetics that scientists are starting to accept that our thoughts and emotions have their own effect on genetic adaptation and evolution.

For example, one of the pioneers in the field of epigenetics, Dr. Bruce Lipton, explains in The Biology of Belief what happens when a baby is conceived in a broken family where there are constant fights and discord, and the mother-to-be is always under stress. What is the physiological response to any sort of violence, whether physical or psychological? It is the fight-or-flight response. If somebody tries to attack her, she will either fight back or run away from the scene so she doesn’t have to fight. Either way she needs strength. Under both circumstances she needs her limbs, so blood circulates to the limbs and away from the visceral organs like the stomach, liver, spleen, lungs, and brain. When the mother is always under stress, the blood flow is more often toward the limbs, and the same happens with the fetus that is growing within, so the blood flow to the fetus’s limbs will be greater than to the visceral organs. The limbs of the child will be longer than in normal human beings.

The second thing that happens is a difference in the growth of the posterior and frontal lobes of the brain. The frontal lobe for cognition and the intuitive faculties develop when the fetus gets a chance to grow in a healthy family environment where there is love and affection. Where there is stress and tension, the back part of the brain grows bigger because the blood flow goes there more often.

The father’s brain may be well developed and his limbs normal, and the same may be true for the mother, but the fetus will have longer limbs and an underdeveloped digestive system. The subtle bodies of the parents, others who come in contact with the baby, and the environment in which the baby is developing have a definite effect on how the baby’s genetic pattern will manifest itself.

Because meditation purifies and refines our subtle bodies, it can play a very important role in epigenetics. When we meditate, what happens? Scientists have done experiments on people who have meditated for 10,000 to 20,000 hours. The myelin sheath that surrounds and insulates the nerve fibers, or axons, becomes thicker. Also, the frontal lobes of the brain are well developed in people who meditate regularly and for reasonable periods of time. So meditation itself has a definite evolutionary effect even on our physiological system. But that is not our goal here. Despite all of these good things, our real evolutionary goal is beyond all these physiological changes.

Most of us are afraid of change, even though we want our lives to change for the better. The problem is that change creates so much discomfort that it shakes our foundation. Take the case of a husband and wife sharing a bed where they have each slept on their own side for years; let’s say the wife is on the right side. Now if one day one of them requests a change, there will be a fight. Even such a simple mundane change becomes a challenge! So when something as massive as our inner spiritual atmosphere changes, we rebel, because our comfort zone is totally shattered. We are used to certain feelings and a certain inner environment.

We have thirteen major points, or chakras, from the heart onward, all the way to the Central Region. One way to describe our spiritual evolution is as a journey from one chakra to the next to the next and, finally, to the thirteenth chakra. We travel through an inner universe that is infinitely vast, with each chakra like a different galaxy in that universe.

And as we move from one galaxy to the next, there will always be a reaction to the movement and the change it brings. In his book, Towards Infinity5, Babuji describes this process of entering each new chakra. He describes the heaviness that develops in the mind, the unsettledness. For many of us, it becomes very difficult to meditate when we feel the discomfort that results from being in a new galaxy.

So how can we best navigate this? Ask for help. On the days when you don’t feel like meditating because your mind is heavy, when you are not in the mood, ask a trainer for a meditation session or use the HeartsApp on your phone to have a session with a trainer. It helps to adjust to the change more easily. Because you are on an evolutionary path, you will find a way to navigate this and adjust to the change.

Each movement, from one chakra to the next, brings with it a new atmosphere inside, as the inner canvas of our consciousness changes so much. As a result, we become unsettled in our practice. But if we wait for these moments with anticipation, we can congratulate ourselves on our progress.

I will share with you an experience. A young lady from Germany came to visit one of our ashrams in India after she started meditating, and she was praising Heartfulness to the skies. I said, “Hold your horses,” and presented her with a diary. I asked her to write what she was saying on the first page, and then I told her that those who have experienced the three introductory Heartfulness sessions generally acknowledge that this is the best thing that has happened to them, yet many drop the practice after some time. She asked for an explanation.

So I responded, “This euphoric feeling that you have is not going to last. Soon a new stage will come when you will move to the next spiritual chakra, and you will say, “Where am I? Why am I here? This does not feel so good anymore.” But that will pass, and after a little while you will know that you have progressed and your consciousness has expanded. It is just the change that feels uncomfortable. So please read this first page and remind yourself that this is the best thing that has happened to you. Read it again when you go through every new phase.”

After some time she wrote to me, “I am not feeling so bad at all. When am I going to progress?”

When we understand the mechanics of spiritual evolution, we learn to welcome the discomfort that comes as an indicator of growth, and the inevitable turbulence that accompanies it, in the same way that an athlete welcomes the discomfort that comes with the training necessary to move to the next level of performance. Also, think of the sort of turbulence that can happen in a flight or in a ship. When such turbulence comes in spirituality, it also means we are moving, whereas if we are steady in our comfort zone, it means we are not moving, and it becomes the Guide’s job to help us move and evolve. When we resist change, he will not push us. Instead he will create circumstances so that we start craving more and more. The Guide is always there to accelerate this process of evolution, but our dynamic and active participation is also needed. The wise among us value time!

Just imagine what is possible if we cooperate, happily accepting the bumpy patches of the journey, and desiring higher and higher conditions. And there are also many more positive changes on the journey. There will be discomfort when we first move to a new chakra, but when we settle down there we will feel at home and we will start to feel so good. The experience of bliss at each successive chakra becomes more and more beautiful, consciousness keeps expanding to new levels, and the clarity and subtlety of the state keeps improving.

The Guide keeps us moving. Once the good things have matured in us at each successive chakra, once we have mastered the field of feelings and experiences at that particular chakra, he creates the conditions so that we gently move to the next chakra. If, of our own accord, we start asking, “Please, I would like to go further,” we will willingly trigger new conditions from our side. That is the key to faster evolution: not being afraid of change but welcoming it.





The Three Bodies: Body, Mind, and Soul


In order to understand this better, let’s explore more deeply the three bodies of a human being: the physical, mental, and spiritual bodies. The first is our physical body, made of flesh and blood. Movement of the sense organs and of perception is the characteristic of the physical body, and action is the nature of this body. While it changes according to how we live our lives, it doesn’t change much. For example we can become fitter, but we cannot become one foot taller or develop extra limbs. Physical evolution happens over longer periods than one lifetime, so we don’t expect our physical body to evolve much in this life.

We also have the mental body, also known as the astral body, the subtle body, the vibrational body, and the mind. It is the field of the heart and mind and is associated with energy. It has the characteristic of thinking, feeling, and understanding. This is the realm of thoughts, feelings and emotions, intuition, inspiration, ego, intellect, wisdom, courage, love, and consciousness. There is both movement and rest in it.

The third body is the spiritual body, also known as the causal body—the cause of our existence—and the soul. The causal body is associated with the absolute state of “nothingness”; it is the base of our existence. Peace or rest is the quality of the soul, which contains all movement in seed form. This causal body is ultimately pure, unchangeable, and immutable, and its evolution is not something we can work on directly. It evolves as a natural outcome of our inner journey through the chakras.



The body where our transformation happens, through which we evolve, is the middle of the three bodies, the subtle body. Remember that our species is Homo sapiens, and our raison d’être is the mind, knowledge, and wisdom, so that is where our evolution happens. Our destiny has everything to do with the evolution and purification of the subtle body.

This evolution happens when we remove the layers of complexities and impurities so as to purify and awaken all the chakras in our system, and then we find that consciousness evolves. This is how we design our destiny. This is what our Heartfulness practices are for.

These three bodies are common to all life. You can understand this by equating them to the concept of the three states of matter, energy, and absolute space in Physics—states that exist in everything in the universe.

In the Mineral Kingdom, all three bodies are so closely tied together that it is difficult to separate them; they don’t have much freedom. To the extent to which they have different vibrations, they have different qualities, and so we give them names like gold, lead, osmium, and so on.

In the Plant Kingdom, the three bodies are less tightly bound together than in minerals. When we observe plants, we see that they have subtle bodies that respond to stimuli. Have you seen flowers that open up as the sun rises and close again when it gets dark, like hibiscuses, Californian poppies, lotuses, and magnolias? Heliotropic flowers turn to face the sun as it moves, such as sunflowers, poppies, marigolds, and daisies. There are also plants like Mimosa pudica (lajwanti, or “sensitive plant”), with sensitive leaves that fold inward when you touch them. When there is a breeze, or even a storm, the leaves and branches of trees dance, but the moment someone tries to cut off a branch, a tree will become agitated. Modern researchers6 describe how trees communicate through their roots, with the help of fungal networks. They also describe the language of trees, how trees build communities and help each other in forests, and how trees learn. Even with all of this, however, the subtle bodies and the causal body of plants are more tightly bound together than in animals.

Animals have still greater separation among all the three bodies than plants do. In human beings the three bodies have the potential to be even more loosely connected, but this also depends on each individual and his or her qualities. Some people have the three bodies tightly bound together, while others show extreme plasticity and freedom. There is a gradient of separation. You might have heard of the three gunas, or qualities, in Vedic philosophy: tamasic, rajasic, and sattvik. These three qualities reflect how loosely or how strongly the bodies are connected in human beings.

A tamasic person is more like a stone or mineral, where the bodies are more tightly bound together, and so the subtle body is not so free. As a result, consciousness is restricted. Such a person will appear to have a very limited mental capacity, not always grasping what is happening around them. Even when we explain something, they won’t always understand, because the subtle body is just not free enough to grasp the concept.

In a rajasic person, the subtle body has a lot more movement, but consciousness is restless and disturbed. The mind is fickle, being pulled in many directions by pleasures and desires. As a result, consciousness is more chaotic and cannot expand to its full extent.

A sattvik person has an expansive, pure consciousness. The subtle body can move around easily so that the sattvik person can project their thoughts anywhere. There is lightness in thought, flexibility, and a sense of wonder toward everything around.

Generally we are a mixture of these gunas, according to our purity and qualities. It is along the gradient of flexibility of the subtle body that we choose to evolve, expanding our field of consciousness.

It may appear that our existence is based on the physical body, and upon this base the subtle bodies and the soul sit, but the reality is the opposite. The soul gives birth to consciousness; actually, they are inseparable. Consciousness then creates its own identity, the ego, for its existence. The ego then uses the intellect for its existence. And for the intellect to thrive, it needs the thinking function of the mind. So in fact it is the soul that supports consciousness, which in turn supports ego, which in turn supports intellect, which in turn supports thinking, and these support the existence of the physical body.





The Subtle Body


The subtle body is our energy field. We can think of it as the field of the heart and mind. It can either be turbulent and complex, like a roaring ocean during a storm, or, at the other end of the spectrum, it can be like a still pond where even a feather landing on the surface creates a ripple. This is where Heartfulness practices have a vital role to play, as they give us the tools to purify and simplify this field, bringing clarity, stillness, and peace.

The heart is the field of action of the mind. What does this mean? There are four main functions within this field—consciousness (chit), thinking and feeling (manas), intellect and wisdom (buddhi), and ego and identity (ahankar). They exist together to make up what we know as the mind, and we call them the four main subtle bodies or elements of the subtle body.

Actually, nineteen elements of the subtle body were described by the Gujarati saint, Haridasji (1862–1938), and they are:

The five cognitive senses: sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch.

The five conative senses: our main energetic processes of elimination, reproduction, movement, grasping with our hands, and speaking.

The five pranas, or energy flows, known as the vayus: the inward flow, the downward and outward flow, the integrating balancing flow, the ascending flow, and the circulatory flow.

The four antakarans, or inner functions of the mind: chit, manas, buddhi, and ahankar.



It is the four antakarans that we primarily work with for our evolution. The other fifteen elements also become refined and balanced through the yogic practices of Heartfulness. Of these four, it is consciousness, or chit, that expands and evolves to weave our destiny, but this happens because of the refinement of the other three. Consciousness is like a canvas to a painter, and on that canvas the play of the other three bodies is orchestrated daily. You could say that they have their existence in consciousness.



We are actively expanding our consciousness so that it evolves. Our spiritual practice creates conditions for progressively stilling the mind to deeper and deeper levels, thus allowing this expansion. At a physical level, we exercise to strengthen our body’s muscles. For the mind to evolve, for consciousness to expand, we need to exercise what belongs to the subtle level of existence—manas, buddhi, and ahankar—to free consciousness so that it can expand and soar. This is done through meditative practices.





Meditation and the Meditative State


What does meditation have to do with this? We meditate to exercise and regulate the mind. An unregulated mind is pulled by wishes and desires, fears and habits, in many different directions. It is rajasic in nature, and it becomes weak as it scatters energy in too many channels. Remember the water canal that Babuji drew on his hand? Compare this to a regulated mind with focus: one application, one channel. When we meditate well, we regulate our minds so that our consciousness can expand and evolve.

Our thinking, intellect, and ego are all refined and developed through meditation. We simplify our thinking process from many channels to one channel so that we learn to concentrate through the practice of meditation. Then we go deeper, from thinking to feeling. Feeling gives us greater direct perception, greater intuition and ability to work with our emotions so that we refine our lifestyle and integrate external behavior with inner states.

We learn the art of observing and witnessing the play of our thoughts through meditation. This helps us to work with our emotions and reactions, especially when the ego is creating problems. We become more sensitive and alert.

Holding and nurturing the meditative state throughout the day is another outcome of good meditation, and helps us to balance and deepen the mind even more. When we are in this state of constant awareness or remembrance of the inner state, our canvas of consciousness cannot be spoiled. It remains fresh and clean, and is not sullied by the formation of impressions.

The subtle bodies span the full spectrum of consciousness, including the subconscious, conscious, and superconscious aspects of the mind. Swami Vivekananda once said, “Consciousness is a mere film between two oceans, the subconscious and the superconscious.” We can also imagine subconsciousness as being a vast ocean, consciousness as the surface of the land, and superconsciousness as the sky going out into the universe. As we evolve, our consciousness expands along the full spectrum, opening up the vastness of our human potential. Another way of saying this is that we go deeper and deeper into ourselves, from our starting point on the surface.

Scientists say the same thing in another way. For example, in The Biology of Belief, Dr. Bruce Lipton says,

When it comes to sheer neurological processing abilities, the subconscious mind is more than a million times more powerful than the conscious mind. If the desires of the conscious mind conflict with the programs of the subconscious mind, which “mind” do you think will win out? . . . the greatest problem that we face is that we think we are running our lives with the wishes, desires and aspirations created by our conscious mind. When we struggle or fail to obtain our goals, we are generally led to conclude that we are victims of outside forces preventing us from reaching our destination. However, neuroscience has now established that the conscious mind runs the show, at best, only about 5 percent of the time. It turns out that the programs acquired by the subconscious mind shape 95 percent or more of our life experiences (Szegedy-Maszak 2005).7



Dr. Lipton does not mention the superconscious, but Arthur Koestler published a book in 1964 called The Act of Creation on how superconscious inspiration manifests in human creativity. When we ponder over great scientific discoveries and yogic findings, the source of such discovery and inspiration comes from the superconscious, which is able to blossom when a person is in an overall relaxed state. Consider the great discovery of the Archimedes Principle, or the fundamental principle of gravitation by Sir Isaac Newton, or radioactivity by Madame Curie, or the discovery of the structure of the benzene molecule and the double helix structure of DNA. They did not appear as a result of rational deductive thought, but instead emerged through dreams or when their discoverers were completely relaxed and not “thinking.” Spiritual findings and scientific findings share the same source. They are not opposed in their approach. But even without acknowledging the superconscious, Dr. Lipton does point out just how much vaster the subconscious is than the conscious mind. With the support of Transmission, we are able to expand our consciousness in both directions, to explore these previously unknown territories of the subconscious and superconscious.





Intellect, Prayer, and Cleaning


In the process of diving deeper within, intelligence becomes more and more heart-based. Intuition and inspiration develop as consciousness expands along the spectrum, and buddhi is fine-tuned, like a sensitive antenna picking up the signals of the heart. As a result, the intellect expands to include more and more wisdom. Often we think of a wise person as someone who makes wise choices, but with this process we go much further into a different dimension altogether, where choice is no longer required, because the heart’s wisdom is so pure and correct. As a result, emotional intelligence, social intelligence, and spiritual intelligence all blossom naturally.

There is a big difference between an intellectual person and a wise person, and the practice of prayer also helps us to move from mere intellect to wisdom. Prayer takes us into the heart, connecting us to the Source, where we are able to let go of any mistakes we have made, deciding not to make the same ones again. Is this not wisdom? If we succumb to foolish mistakes day after day, hour after hour, we are not becoming wiser. We become wiser when we wish to change from the bottom of our hearts and ask for help to do so. When we live with this attitude every moment, wisdom flourishes.

Wisdom means to utilize to the best of all our faculties. Wisdom is to have the maximum output with the minimum input. With minimum action we have the maximum result: more and more with less and less effort. Only with a meditative mind, only through meditative acts in our day-to-day life can we expect to have such good results.

For this to happen, the subtle bodies have to be pure; otherwise it is like expecting to see the bottom of a lake through muddy, turbulent water. There is no clarity in a turbulent mind. The practice of Cleaning past impressions is therefore necessary for consciousness to evolve.





Ego


The third subtle body is the ego, ahankar. The ego plays a vital role in whether or not the expansion of consciousness occurs. The ego is often seen as the bad guy, but it is essential for life and for evolution. It is an active function of the mind—the doing, thinking function—and we need it in every aspect of daily life, even to want to evolve. It gives us our identity. It is the activating or initiating force. If it is used wisely, it serves us well, but when the ego is used for selfish purposes, we become arrogant and self-important. When we constantly refine the ego, consciousness develops very rapidly.

What does “refine the ego” mean? The more humility we have, the more beneficial the ego is for our evolution. All great teachers of spirituality, religion, and ethics have given so much importance to this aspect of character formation. They have valued the quality of humility so highly that at any cost it must be maintained. The philosophy here is that there is nothing wrong in thinking ourselves to be great, as long as we always think that the other person is greater.

Otherwise the ego can be like a black hole. It can have a very strong gravitational pull upon our consciousness, preventing consciousness from expanding. Just as the earth’s gravitational pull does not allow us to fall off the earth into infinite space, likewise our ego can bind consciousness and restrict it to a very limited field. This happens to an extreme extent in a very narcissistic person, whose consciousness contracts in on itself and can become stonelike. Another example is a very arrogant man with a bloated ego. Have you observed how such an individual communicates with others? In contrast, as we become more and more humble, consciousness is able to expand infinitely, and goodness is expressed through cultured communication.

The ego manifests itself in many ways. For example, a concert flautist performs, giving so much joy to the listeners and they reciprocate accordingly. Now, as an artist, he will not be happy unless he surpasses his previous performances. It is the ego that makes him perform well. In this way, the ego can help us to develop excellence in any field, worldly or spiritual, through self-respect and self-pride. It can be our best friend in helping us outperform our own past performance. But to think that no one can play the flute better than us is not a welcome manifestation of ego. It is blatant ego at its worst, known as arrogance.

The ego raises its head in all sorts of daily situations. For example, when we are having a discussion at home with our children or spouse, there are times when there is a disagreement. Generally, when the other person is unable to accept our point of view, we label them egotistic. So we relate nonacceptance with the ego: the person is unable to accept because of ego. And in today’s world, individual freedom is given so much importance that there is no possibility of oneness. If individuality is at the cost of others, then it becomes a source of conflict and separation. In a state of perfect oneness, there is no hurt arising out of ego—and selfishness dissolves.

Imagine two or three individuals, each with their own strong ideas, having a discussion. Though they may all be very intelligent, their beliefs and ideas will separate them and they will not come together. But the moment we respect the ideas and opinions of others and honor them, then the various differences that we all have can be integrated together, which will only enrich our thought and broaden our perspective. We can only respect and harness each other’s talents, opinions, and ideas when the ego is subdued. When there are multiple egos involved in any situation, it can lead to a clash of egos in that “multiverse.” There is a possibility of unity when we admire one another in a true sense, in an authentic way. So we can say that acceptance is an antidote to the ego.

Think about it: Is the ego involved in the state of acceptance when we say yes to someone else’s request? Not at all. But when, instead, we fight it out, or we say, “I reject that,” then the ego sounds quite magnificent—so big and so heavy. When we say “Yes,” many possibilities automatically open up. When we say “No,” it’s a dead end. When we accept, the ego dissolves—and when the ego dissolves, there is transcendence.





Thinking and Contemplation


The fourth function of the subtle body is manas, which is the function of thinking and contemplation. During Heartfulness Meditation, the first step is to bring the attention of the mind from many scattered thoughts to just a single thought, the source of divine light in the heart. We practice being one-pointed, and over time, concentration develops naturally. But it is not necessary that throughout Meditation we stay stuck on this one thought. The thought should leave at some point so that the object of thought can be felt in the heart.

If we keep thinking during Meditation, we will have a headache, and consciousness will not expand. The initial thought, the object of Meditation, is just a springboard to take us deeper. It is an assumption, or hypothesis, as in a scientific experiment. This assumption is eventually proven to be correct when we start to dissolve in the experience of the presence of the divine light upon which we are meditating. And then we go deeper and further—as we feel that presence, we slowly disappear so that even that feeling is gone. Then the ego is gone, and we are not even there to experience it.

As manas evolves through Meditation practice, thinking evolves and expands to encompass feeling, and eventually expands beyond feeling to the state of being, then to the state of nonbeing, to merge into the absolute state of existence. Once again, these states only make sense through experience.





Consciousness


As intellect, ego, and thinking evolve through our spiritual practice, these subtle bodies become lighter, purer, simpler, and more refined, and the lake of consciousness becomes still with almost no ripples. It can expand and evolve.

Now, what can we do with this expanded consciousness? We can do much more than simply enjoying it during Meditation. Let’s say we have a particular state after Meditation and are aware that the condition we have received is good. Then we go off to work. We have already discussed how to hold that condition throughout the day. More than that, why not also radiate that condition willfully, consciously, and with the confidence that wherever we go it will spread its fragrance?

After Meditation in the morning, think for a while that, “The condition that is within me is also outside me. Everything around me is absorbed in a similar state. When I look at people or talk to them or listen to them or am silent, I let that condition spread everywhere.” Let consciousness expand wherever it finds its way.

When we observe the subtle bodies of highly evolved beings, they have complete freedom. The subtle body can travel anywhere, do any spiritual work that is given, and return back. That is why in spirituality we have the tradition of the living Guide. However great the past saints and spiritual teachers may have been, they cannot directly help us in the same way that a living Guide can. Why is this so? Because the spiritual work requires our psychological mindset to be corrected, and the living Guide is able to use his subtle bodies to remove the samskaras of the seeker at the root through subtle suggestion, cleaning, Transmission, and prayer.

Many a time I witnessed Chariji reading letters or meeting people who wanted to explain something in words to him. Without any words being spoken, he felt what was needed. There was no thinking involved in the process of making a decision. He was able to give very wise advice to help people without having to think things through, because his manas was so evolved. Another example of this comes from the anecdotes of Swami Vivekananda about Ramakrishna Paramahansa, when he said, “I could not believe my own ears when I heard Western people talking so much of consciousness! Consciousness? What does consciousness matter! Why, it is nothing compared with the unfathomable depths of the subconscious and the heights of the superconscious! In this I could never be misled, for had I not seen Ramakrishna Paramahamsa gather in ten minutes, from a man’s subconscious mind, the whole of his past, and determine from that his future and his powers?”





Levels of Subtlety


With spiritual progress, we become lighter and lighter, so we slowly adjust to greater subtlety in everything we do, including daily activities like the food we eat. It is also because of the greater freedom with which the three bodies are connected in an evolved human being that it is beneficial to eat lighter, vegetarian food. As mentioned earlier, the physical and subtle bodies of plants are generally more closely bound together than in animals, and the more evolved the animal, the greater that separation can be. The less tight the tethering of the subtle bodies is to the physical body, the more possibility of pain there is in death.

Imagine that a great saint is in front of you. It would be unthinkable to eat that person because their subtle bodies are everywhere. He or she is one of the most evolved beings in the universe, and if you were to kill them the pain associated would be enormous because of their highly evolved consciousness. The subtler the being, the more evolved the subtle body, so the more pain there is. And that pain is then transmitted to whomever or whatever consumes it. The vibratory level of the food we consume becomes a part of us.

How do we adjust to increasing levels of subtlety? When you finish your Meditation, try to hold that state even though you have to struggle with all the incompatible things around you. It is a challenge, and that is where our exercise begins. The subtle body has to adjust—consciousness, thinking, intellect, and ego all have to adjust to the surroundings. That is why, in the beginning, we get so angry if something disturbs our peace during meditation or after we have finished. After some time we get used to these disturbances, and we master the art of holding on to the meditative state no matter what is going on around us.

To what extent can consciousness develop? When consciousness, thinking and feeling mind, intellect, and ego reach their highest potential, consciousness is able to evolve to the level of divine consciousness. At the pinnacle of evolution the mind is completely open, with no fear. Such highly evolved souls are totally free, totally open.

So this whole exercise is about the evolutionary process of reaching our highest potential of consciousness. Another way of describing this journey is that we are going back to our original consciousness, our original state. Now, in that original state we had no samskaras, we were completely pure and light. So what was the first samskara that came into being when we were first created? It was fear, the fear of separation from our Source. Once that first samskara of fear is removed, the rest of the samskaras are able to leave on their own if we remain open to change. And in Heartfulness, that foundation of the samskaric edifice, primordial fear, is removed in the first few introductory Meditation sessions.

During the introductory Heartfulness Meditation sessions, three gifts are given:

The ability to effectively practice your own daily Cleaning is enabled.

The Divine Light already existing in your heart is ignited.

The connection between your heart and the heart of the Guide is established.



The art of living is to live without demanding anything, being grateful to the Ultimate. This itself is a big step in evolution: accepting what we are, what others are, and moving on. We have enough difficulty changing ourselves, so why try to change the world? Even God cannot change the world, which is His creation. So why break our heads trying to change our spouse, our children, our boss? Cheerful acceptance is a quantum leap in itself.

The four fundamental elements of the subtle body—consciousness, mind, intellect, and ego—are dynamic principles. They express themselves in our day-to-day behavior and interactions. Our behavioral patterns are actually a reflection of the level of purity of our subtle body expressed in the simplicity and purity of our lifestyle and relationships.

In the Heartfulness practice of Cleaning, what is the suggestion that we make? That all complexities and impurities are going away from the back. See how simple it is? When complexities are gone, we become simple; when impurities are gone, we become pure. It is a beautiful method, a flawless method, with the suggestion every evening that all complexities and impurities are going away. That fundamental thing, the removal of complexities and impurities, is a powerful process.





CHAPTER 14



DESTINY AND VIBRATION





Vibratory Compatibility


COMPATIBILITY IS AN extremely fine concept. When compatibility is not there, where is harmony and unity? Things don’t gel. For example, when an IT professional from a poor Indian background goes to work in a European city for a big company, sometimes he will be put up in a five-star hotel without knowing how to use a knife and fork or a bathtub. He will be out of sync with that environment until he adjusts his lifestyle to match the surroundings. He is not yet compatible with the environment. Or take another example: when you take one medication, and by accident you eat something that is not compatible with that drug, there is a war inside you and you suffer as a result of it.

Compatibility is also an important issue in human relationships. The question most of us ask is: “How can I develop compatibility with one and all?” We can adjust ourselves to be in sync with our spouse after thirty years of association, and with our children because as they grow up their samskaras manifest and we get used to one another. But with business partners at work, or in a school or college, there is an entire gamut of vibratory levels. Can we be in harmony with all of them at once? This happens only when we develop the empathy and acceptance to resonate with others, even when we do not agree with them. And these capacities are known as emotional intelligence (EQ) and social intelligence (SQ). They naturally develop with the expansion of consciousness that comes with spiritual practice.

Think of it like this: two people are climbing up a mountain, on opposite sides. The person climbing up the west slope can only see the west side of the mountain, and that colors her perception. The person climbing up the east side can only see the east, the opposite perspective. The two sides could be any duality: science versus religion, profit versus environmental sustainability in business, responsibility versus acceptance. Only when we reach the top of the mountain can we see both perspectives, integrate them into a 360-degree vision of the whole, and see all points of view. Only when our consciousness has expanded fully can we do this so that our vibrational levels are truly in harmony with everyone and everything in the universe.





Vibratory Level at Death


Earlier in the book, I mentioned that our destiny is not only associated with this physical dimension, but also with other dimensions—so what happens at the moment of death? Our vehicle, the physical body, is recycled back into the pool of atoms of matter, the five elements known as the pancha bhutas. Now what happens to the other two bodies, the subtle body and the soul? During any lifetime we create a vibratory blueprint that determines our onward destination, and at the moment of death our subtle bodies and soul go to the dimension that corresponds with that blueprint. They must match. The soul finds its level and its dimension according to the level of purity we have nurtured in the subtle bodies that envelop it and the potency of the soul. We determine this onward destination according to how we have lived our life on Earth. Some of us will come back again to a physical existence, because we have attached ourselves to people and things in this physical world that draw us back again. That is the play of our samskaras. Others of us will carry on to other subtler dimensions, where there is no need for a physical body. It all depends on the vibrational potency we have created during the life we have lived. There are many possibilities, but this topic is not within the scope of this book.

Some people ask: Can I purify myself at the moment of death so that my vibratory level is in tune with a very fine dimension? It doesn’t work that way, because we cannot achieve something at the last moment. If we study a day before an exam, we may pass, but the outcome will be different if we prepare slowly from day one. Exams can happen any day. Death can happen any day, rather any moment. So to prepare ourselves to face the next dimension, it is good to remain in a very pure, fine vibratory level, and that is the vibration of love. It helps to have a lifestyle where we are always prepared for that last moment. Actually, it is not like the exam where we pass or fail, and this is not a reference to heaven and hell. It is a simple vibrational match: if my condition is very light, I will carry on to a lighter realm, whereas if I am carrying samskaric burdens, their weight will pull me back to the physical realm.

In addition to the work we do on ourselves, the Guide prepares us for this onward journey. Just as a mother gives birth to our physical entity into this physical world, a Guide of caliber can give birth to our Spiritual Entity into the higher dimensions known as the Brighter World. This is a very crucial step in the onward destiny of a seeker. The fascinating thing is that we remain alive here in this physical dimension while our Spiritual Entity is born into the Brighter World. Our Spiritual Entity can dwell in multiple dimensions. How do we understand this? Have you ever been in one place physically but thinking about somewhere else entirely? The mind is in another dimension, right? You may also be remembering someone you love dearly in the back of your mind, so your feeling is somewhere else again. We actually use our capacity to exist in multiple dimensions much more than we might think!

The functions of a mother and a true Guide are very similar. The mother nurtures the child within her womb for nine months before giving birth, and the Guide nurtures the spiritual child, the seeker, within his mental womb for some time. During this period, the seeker receives energy and nourishment from the spiritual waves of the Guide’s thoughts. When the time is right, the seeker is born in the Brighter World, and his or her life commences in other dimensions.

When we are able to truly stay in the mental sphere of the Guide, surrendering everything to him, it takes only seven months for him to deliver us into the Brighter World, but the process is generally delayed because we are preoccupied with our own thoughts, feelings, and desires. If and when we are able to accept the Guide as a spiritual mother, the whole process becomes simple and natural, because we feel love and reverence for him, and naturally surrender just like a baby does to a mother.

But our relationship with the Guide generally does not start out with such a high level of acceptance and surrender. We may start by expecting to receive peace of mind, stillness, and a happy life, but eventually all of those things drop off, and we start accepting whatever comes very graciously. In one way, the role of the Guide is to help us accept life’s situations with better understanding.

Just as there is tremendous joy when a mother delivers her baby into the physical world, there is also tremendous joy when the Guide delivers the seeker’s Spiritual Entity into the Brighter World. The success of this delivery depends on our ability as seekers: it is not just the Guide’s ability to retain the seeker, but also our ability to be retained in the Guide’s mental womb due to immense love. Love is always for the sake of love, and the spiritual vacuum we create in our hearts pulls the flow of divine grace toward us.

At the time of our death, when the vehicle of the physical body expires, if we have a Spiritual Entity, it merges with the soul and subtle bodies. This mergence of the soul with the Spiritual Entity is called mahasamadhi. So the prerequisite for mahasamadhi is to have a Spiritual Entity. And the prerequisite for that is to build such a relationship with the Guide that we remain in his mental womb for at least seven months.

But there can be many other types of death and destinations after death, according to the vibratory blueprint we create during this life. Even among liberated souls, there are those who have a Spiritual Entity and those who do not have a Spiritual Entity in another dimension, because they do not have a living Guide who can create that Spiritual Entity, and so their deaths and their destinies will be different. Those souls that still carry a burden of samskaras in their subtle bodies will necessarily have to come back to this physical dimension, because of the weight of those impressions. This is not a punishment, just a simple fact that when we are attached to anything on the physical plane of existence, that attachment will pull us back here after death. That process is known as rebirth, which brings us to the next aspect of vibratory compatibility.





Vibratory Level at Conception


Now what happens at the beginning of the earthly journey, when we enter this world at the time of conception? What determines our parents, our place of birth, and the life we will lead here on earth?

Once I was visiting Chariji and I asked him, “Is the place of conception important? Is the time and place of delivery important?”

He replied, “None of these,” and then said, “Think over it.”

He then told us a story from the Mahabharata to give us a hint:

Raja Vichitravirya, the father of Dhritharashtra, Pandu, and Vidur, had two queens, but was unfortunately impotent. After his death, his mother wanted to ensure that he left behind a successor for the continuity of the royal lineage. An astrologer told her, “This is the perfect auspicious time. If the queens can conceive during the next two hours, the children will be of a glorious nature, worthy of a king’s succession.”

So she ordered her eldest son, who was a rishi, to come. He came immediately, unwashed, with mattered hair flowing and smelling unpleasant. He went to mate with the first queen, and when she saw him she was aghast and closed her eyes: “My God! With this man I have to mate!” Disgusted, she said, “All right, if it is necessary, so let it be.”

Likewise, when the rishi went to the second queen’s chamber, she was frozen as if her blood circulation had completely stopped. Two children were conceived: the child born to the first queen was blind, and the child born to the second had pale, leucodermic skin. The condition of these children at birth was determined by the attitude of the queens at the moment of conception.

These two queens had also decided upon a backup plan in case they failed to conceive. They requested one of their maids to also mate with the rishi. The maid felt so proud, honored, thankful, and grateful to God for sending the rishi to give her a child, and her child was the wisest of the lot.

A beautiful idea emerged from this discussion with Chariji: it is the attitude of the couple at the moment of conception that matters. At the moment of conception, not just any soul, but a soul with the corresponding vibratory level matching with the future parents, will descend into the womb that has the specific vibratory level. It will match. It is like iron filings drawn to a magnet—it is a natural process where the vibratory blueprint of a particular soul will be attracted to the blueprint offered by the parents. The attitude of the parents will make all the difference. It is like lock and key. So you are deciding the destiny of your family at that time. And can you manufacture a super fine vibratory level at that moment? No. At the moment of conception you cannot fabricate it just because you want a Jesus Christ or a Vivekananda in your family. The preparation has to be done years ahead.

Once the soul has descended, it is too late to manipulate the time of birth by Caesarean section to try for a particular destiny according to astrology. The baby already has the baggage of its own samskaras. How does it matter afterward when these samskaras unfold? So the time of birth is not important in itself, because the load of samskara is already there. The soul that will be embodied and delivered is already there.





Vibratory Level and Meditation


Just as we take birth according to the vibratory level of our parents, likewise, when we sit to meditate, we prepare the canvas of our vibratory field to receive a spiritual condition. What is that state of consciousness? Take a minute to think about the canvas you create in the morning when you meditate. What is your attitude? Are you thinking, “Is my mother watching to see if I have my eyes closed?” And what happens when you are rushing, when you need to finish meditation quickly to get ready for college or work? Perhaps you really want to meditate with all your heart, but you are really pressed for time. What sort of creative condition will come?

At least those two queens in the Mahabharata could conceive one blind child and one weak child. Will you be able to create any condition? Not if you meditate half-heartedly or in a rush. And, sometimes, a wonderful condition is created, but it is aborted, as in the early days of pregnancy. This happens when you are careless about your lifestyle. You meditate so beautifully, and then straight away you go out into the world without imbibing your condition, and there goes your condition.

Now contrast those scenarios with one where you go to bed in a prayerful condition, sleeping with the longing that you will wake up early to meet your beloved in meditation with so much love in your heart. You wake early, refreshed, with a heart full of love and intense longing. What is the state of your consciousness now? What sort of canvas have you created to receive a spiritual condition? Then you meditate, acquire the condition, and take time to enliven it, imbibe it, become one with it, and merge with it.





Take Interest


So the key is to take interest in how you conduct your life, because that is what destiny is all about. Kahlil Gibran wrote in his book, The Prophet, “Work is love made visible. And if you cannot work with love but only with distaste, it is better that you should leave your work and sit at the gate of the temple and take alms of those who work with joy.” It is the same with meditation. Do it with love; do it with interest. Poise, focus, and enthusiasm go a long way in creating the right vibratory field for us to design our destiny. It does not take much to change the trajectory of a life—in fact, it is as simple as turning our head from one side to the other.

I think a lot depends on what we really want. We will certainly find time for things that interest us. For things that do not interest us, even if we have the time we will run away from them. So it is not a matter of finding time. Do we have the interest? If we do, then we will find the time. Success in spirituality, as in education, career, or any other field, depends upon three principles:

Do you really want it? Are you interested?

Are you committed?

What are you doing for it?

If our lives are governed by these three principles, I think we will easily bring forward the lofty goal of absolute balance and enlightenment into the here and now.

At the same time, the evolution of our consciousness will help us perform our duties and actions so well that people will be amazed at every little thing we do, be it in business, studies or family life. This perfection will slowly percolate into our relationships and career. So even at a worldly level, it is worth investing our emotional energies into meditation so that we don’t lose our balance.

And there are many other reasons to meditate even after we reach that lofty height of spirituality. Not only will we achieve the goal for ourselves, we can then meditate for others. Whenever we meditate and think of someone else, that person in some miraculous way is also affected by our condition. And when another person is thinking of us when we meditate, automatically our consciousness touches their hearts. They also feel at ease, at peace. So our meditation not only brings a revolution in our own hearts and so much peace and tranquility, it also helps others who are not actively meditating by the simple fact that they are associated with us in some way.

One day, I was asking some young people a question: “How long is the spiritual journey?”

One person answered very brilliantly, “The blink of an eye.”

That means we can achieve the highest within a fraction of a second.

Another person said, “It is infinite, never ending.”

Both are right. We expand infinitely with love and contract infinitely into that zero state with the blink of an eye and are totally gone within. That is also infinity. This contraction and expansion is a constant process in which we expand with love and contract into insignificance. This exercise should go on.

Our soul is craving something really magnificent. It is craving that ultimate state of oneness we call Samadhi in Yoga, which means “that which prevailed before the creation came into existence.” Samadhi is considered to be the goal of Yoga, an inner experience of purity and balance that is one with the original state. During our yogic practice, we also encounter various stages or glimpses of Samadhi as we progress on the journey toward this original state. Samadhi is the ultimate spiritual relaxation and the ultimate effortless concentration, and it is considered to be the goal of human existence in Yoga.

Unless and until we achieve that absolute balance within, the soul will always find some sort of shortcoming in anything we do in life. When we achieve the Samadhi state in all our activities, both worldly and spiritual, then true happiness will come on its own, even at those times when we seem to fail in our actions in the worldly sense. We will remain unshaken. Try to invite such states of Samadhi day after day and make them permanent. That is the Heartfulness way.

I wish you all the best in this grand adventure of evolution and destiny, and hope to join you as a fellow traveler on this magnificent journey toward the ultimate destination.





__________________

1. Swami Vivekananda, “The Cosmos, The Microcosm,” Jnana Yoga (USA: Vedanta Press, 1899), chapter 12.

2. Ram Chandra, Complete Works of Ram Chandra, vol. 3. (India: Shri Ram Chandra Mission, 2009.)

3. Ram Chandra, Complete Works of Ram Chandra, vol. 1. (India: Shri Ram Chandra Mission, 2015.)

4. Ram Chandra, Efficacy of Raja Yoga in the Light of Sahaj Marg. (India: Shri Ram Chandra Mission, 2014.)

5. Ram Chandra, Towards Infinity. (India: Shri Ram Chandra Mission, 2015.)

6. D.G. Haskell, The Songs of Trees. (Australia: Black Inc., 2017.)

7. Bruce Lipton, The Biology of Belief. (Carlsbad, CA: Hay House, 2008.).





GLOSSARY





ahankar: Identity, ego, and will. One of the four main subtle bodies.

antakaran: The inner being, the inner cause or origin of thought and feeling. The word originates from the Sanskrit antar.

Ashtanga Yoga: Patanjali’s description of Yoga made up of eight limbs or steps: Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi.

Asana: Aligning posture. The third limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga.

buddhi: The mind’s discriminating instrument, intellect, and intelligence. It evolves to encompass intuition, wisdom, and higher ignorance. One of the four main subtle bodies.

Chandra Nadi: One of the three main energy channels in the body, associated with the moon, the parasympathetic nervous system, the left nostril for breathing, the left side of the body, rest, and sleep. Is also called the Ida Nadi.

chit: Consciousness. It is one of the four main subtle bodies, which is purified and expands as we evolve.

Dharana: Aligning thoughts, the flow of intention, inward. The sixth limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga.

Dhyana: Regulating the mind and expanding the spectrum of consciousness to reach the Center. The seventh limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga.

egregore: A collective thought-form, feeling-form, or vibrational field. It is created by our collective thoughts and feelings. It creates an atmosphere.

Ekadashi: The eleventh day after each full moon and new moon in the lunar cycle, which is generally observed as a day of fasting in the Hindu calendar.

ghazal: A form of amatory poetry, an ode, often sung, expressing the beauty of love and the pain of separation from the Beloved.

gunas: The three qualities of nature in Indian schools of philosophy: sat, raj, and tam.

Guru: One who transmits light or knowledge; a spiritual teacher.

gurukula: The ancient Indian system of education where students live with the Guru.

Ida: The Nadi or subtle current starting and ending on the left side of the spinal cord, associated with the moon and the parasympathetic nervous system. See Chandra Nadi.

japa: Remembrance of God, often in the form of the repetition of the name of God or a mantra.

jnana, gyan, gyana: Knowledge; the ability to think, reflect, and exhibit good behavior.

Jnana Yoga: The path or aspect of Yoga associated with knowledge and wisdom. Jnana Yoga is the practical realization of the condition prevailing at each chakra on the spiritual journey.

karana sharir: Causal body, or soul. It is the cause of the subtle and physical bodies. It contains the seeds of all the formations of the sensory and motor organs and the mind.

karma: Action. Results of actions or fruits of actions are also called karma.

Kena Upanishad: One of the primary Upanishads, it is a Vedic Sanskrit text notable for its discussion of Brahman with and without attributes, and a treatise on pure knowledge.

Mahabharata: Great epic war in Indian history, involving the Pandavas, Kauravas, and Lord Krishna.

mahasamadhi: The final Samadhi when an evolved soul leaves the body and merges with the Spiritual Entity in the Brighter World.

manas: Mind. Also the name of one of the four main subtle bodies, contemplative thinking, and feeling function.

mantra: A sound, sometimes repeated, particularly a sacred sound, word, or phrase.

Nirvana: A transcendent state in which there is neither suffering, desire, nor a sense of self, and the subject is released from the effects of karma and the cycle of death and rebirth. It represents the final goal of Buddhism.

Niyama: Refining behavior by cultivating noble qualities. The second limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga.

pancha bhutas: The five ancient elements of nature: earth, water, fire, air, and ether. Each of the chakras within the Heart Region is dominated by one of these elements—chakra 1 by earth, chakra 2 by ether, chakra 3 by fire, chakra 4 by water and chakra 5 by air.

Pingala: The Nadi or subtle current starting and ending on the right side of the spinal cord, associated with the sun and the sympathetic nervous system. See Surya Nadi.

prana: Energy, life, breath.

pranahuti: Yogic transmission. Derived from prana, meaning life, and ahuti, meaning offering. Offering of the life force from the Guru’s heart into the disciple’s heart.

pranasya prana: Literally “life in life.” A term used in the Kena Upanishad to describe pranahuti.

Pranayama: Refining the energy body—aligning energy and breath. The fourth limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga.

Pratyahara: Refining the attention—aligning the senses inward. The fifth limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga.

rajasic: Pertaining to and promoting raj, one of the three gunas, associated with activity and desires.

sahaj: Means “natural.” Sahaj Samadhi is natural Samadhi, for example, where a person is in the original state of balance while also completely alert and active in the world, with 360-degree consciousness.

Samadhi: Original balance. Realizing nonbeing—the absolute state of balance at the Center. The eighth limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga and the culmination of yogic practice.

samskara: Impression.

sankalpa: Subtle, prayerful suggestion backed by intention.

sat-chit-anand: Existence-consciousness-bliss. The state associated with Sahasra-Dal-Kamal, the thousand-petaled lotus.

sattvik: Pertaining to sat, one of the three gunas that promotes peace, calmness, nobility.

shastra: Holy book, scripture.

sloka: A verse.

sookshma sharir: The subtle body, astral body, or heart-mind.

sthoola sharir: Physical body.

Surya Nadi: One of the three main energy channels in the body, associated with the sun, the sympathetic nervous system, the right nostril for breathing, the right side of the body, and activity. It is also called the Pingala Nadi.

Surya Namaskar: A series of graceful Asanas practiced to salute the sun.

Sushumna Nadi: The central Nadi in the body, running straight up the spinal cord. It is the central channel for the flow of prana, associated with balance and symmetry.

sushupti: One of the four states of consciousness. It is described as the consciousness of deep sleep in which a man does not dream. When this state of mind is attained, a man gets in close communion with God, though he remains in a forgetful state.

tamasic: Pertaining to and promoting tam, one of the three gunas, associated with inertness, laziness, dullness, and procrastination.

tavajjo: Means “attention”; the Farsi equivalent of Transmission, or pranahuti.

Turiya: Fourth state. The other three states are: jagrat—waking state; swapna—dream state; sushupti—deep sleep state.

Turiyatit: Beyond the Turiya condition, where the soul becomes one with God and the Turiya condition expands into daily life.

Vairagya: Detachment, renunciation.

vayu: Air, air principle.

Yama: Refining behavior—removing unwanted habits. The first limb of Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga.

Yoga: Means “union, joining.” The practices and philosophy leading to the union of the lower self with the Higher Self or God.

Yoga Sutras: A treatise describing the principles of Yoga, containing 196 sutras written by the great sage, Patanjali. Notably, it introduces the eight limbs of Ashtanga Yoga.





RECOMMENDED READING





Heartfulness Literature


The Heartfulness Way: Heart-Based Meditations for Spiritual Transformation, by Kamlesh D. Patel and Joshua Pollock

Complete Works of Ram Chandra, Volumes 1 to 6, by Ram Chandra

Reality at Dawn, by Ram Chandra (also in Volume 1 of the Complete Works)

Efficacy of Raja Yoga in the Light of Sahaj Marg, by Ram Chandra (also in Volume 1 of the Complete Works)

Towards Infinity, by Ram Chandra (also in Volume 1 of the Complete Works)





Other Recommended Books


Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, Volumes 1 to 9, by Swami Vivekananda

Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More than IQ, by Daniel Goleman

The Biology of Belief: Unleashing the Power of Consciousness, Matter & Miracles, by Dr. Bruce Lipton

The Songs of Trees: Stories from Nature’s Great Connectors, by David George Haskell





ABOUT HEARTFULNESS





Heartfulness is a heart-centered approach to life. It is to live naturally, in accordance with the qualities and attitudes of a heart enlightened and refined through spiritual practice. This includes qualities such as compassion, kindness, empathy, sincerity, contentment, truthfulness, and forgiveness; attitudes such as generosity and acceptance; and the heart’s fundamental nature, which is love. The Heartfulness approach to life is supported by four basic practices for beginners. From the very first day, these practices start revealing these qualities in us.

Heartfulness is a system of Raja-Yoga meditation that emerged out of Northern India a century ago. Over time it was simplified and distilled into the practices we know today, which are available through the Heartfulness Institute. Heartfulness Centers exist in 130 countries, and there are currently over 10,000 certified trainers offering meditation sessions free of charge to all who are interested to learn and master the practices.





Experience Heartfulness Firsthand


Heartfulness Institute US website: www.heartfulness.org

Heartfulness Institute UK website: www.heartfulness.uk

Download the HeartsApp for Android and iOS to contact a trainer, to schedule classes, and for access to guided practices, classes, and online meditation sessions.

Contact a trainer in one of our centers, known as HeartSpots, at https://heartspots.heartfulness.org.

Follow the three introductory masterclasses online at https://heartfulness.org/en/masterclass.

Connect with the Heartfulness Institute:

On Facebook: www.facebook.com/practiceheartfulness

On Twitter: @heartful_ness

On Instagram: @heartfulness

Connect with Daaji:

Daaji’s website: www.daaji.org

On Facebook: www.facebook.com/kamleshdaaji

On Twitter: @kamleshdaaji

On Instagram: @kamleshdaaji

Read the Heartfulness Magazine: www.heartfulnessmagazine.com





ABOUT THE AUTHOR





Known widely as Daaji, Kamlesh D. Patel has been a student of spirituality all his life. He is interested in sharing his learnings from his personal experience on the path of Heartfulness, while reflecting his deep spirit of inquiry and respect for the world’s great spiritual traditions and scientific advancements.

Daaji practiced pharmacy in New York City for over three decades before being named the successor in a century-old lineage of spiritual masters. He is the fourth and current Heartfulness Guide, fulfilling the many duties of a modern-day teacher of yogic meditation and purposeful living.

Today he extends his support to spiritual seekers everywhere, sharing yogic Transmission with one and all, so that even novices can experience the effects of meditation. This Transmission is a special feature of Heartfulness, which makes this system so effective. He also devotes much of his time and energy to research in the field of consciousness and spirituality, approaching the subject with scientific methodology—a practical approach that stems from his own experience and mastery in the field.

Connect with him and the Heartfulness Institute at www.heartfulness.org and www.daaji.org.





We hope you enjoyed this Hay House book. If you’d like to receive our online catalog featuring additional information on Hay House books and products, or if you’d like to find out more about the Hay Foundation, please contact:




Hay House, Inc., P.O. Box 5100, Carlsbad, CA 92018-5100

(760) 431-7695 or (800) 654-5126

(760) 431-6948 (fax) or (800) 650-5115 (fax)

www.hayhouse.com® • www.hayfoundation.org



Published in Australia by: Hay House Australia Pty. Ltd.,

18/36 Ralph St., Alexandria NSW 2015

Phone: 612-9669-4299 • Fax: 612-9669-4144

www.hayhouse.com.au

Published in the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK, Ltd.,

The Sixth Floor, Watson House, 54 Baker Street, London W1U 7BU

Phone: +44 (0)20 3927 7290 • Fax: +44 (0)20 3927 7291

www.hayhouse.co.uk

Published in India by: Hay House Publishers India,

Muskaan Complex, Plot No. 3, B-2, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110 070

Phone: 91-11-4176-1620 • Fax: 91-11-4176-1630

www.hayhouse.co.in



Access New Knowledge.

Anytime. Anywhere.

Learn and evolve at your own pace

with the world’s leading experts.

www.hayhouseU.com





The techniques and methods contained in this book are the result of the author’s experience, and this publication is sold with the understanding that the author and publisher are not engaged in rendering medical, mental health, or other professional advice. If expert assistance is required, the services of a professional should be sought. The author and publisher specifically disclaim any liability that is incurred from the use or application of the contents of this book.

Any links or references to third-party resources are provided as a convenience and for informational purposes only; they do not constitute an endorsement or an approval by the author or publisher of any products, services, or opinions of a third party. While the information provided in this book is based upon sources that the author believes to be reliable, neither the author nor the publisher can control the accuracy, legality, accessibility, or content of any external site or resource listed here. Please address any questions regarding third-party content to the owners of the external resource.

Copyright © 2023 by Heartfulness Institute. Illustrations by Uma Maheshwari

Cover design by Shreya Gupta. Cover copyright © 2023 by Hachette Book Group, Inc.

Hachette Book Group supports the right to free expression and the value of copyright. The purpose of copyright is to encourage writers and artists to produce the creative works that enrich our culture.

The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book without permission is a theft of the author’s intellectual property. If you would like permission to use material from the book (other than for review purposes), please contact permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of the author’s rights.

Balance

Hachette Book Group

1290 Avenue of the Americas

New York, NY 10104

GCP-Balance.com

Twitter.com/GCPBalance

Instagram.com/GCPBalance

First Edition: October 2023

Balance is an imprint of Grand Central Publishing. The Balance name and logo are trademarks of Hachette Book Group, Inc.

The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their content) that are not owned by the publisher.

Balance books may be purchased in bulk for business, educational, or promotional use. For information, please contact your local bookseller or the Hachette Book Group Special Markets Department at special.markets@hbgusa.com.

Heartfulness Meditation practices used with the permission of the Heartfulness Institute.

Print book interior design by Bart Dawson

Library of Congress Control Number: 2023941323

ISBNs: 978-1-5387-4095-8 (paper over board), 978-1-5387-4097-2 (ebook)

E3-20231017-JV-NF-ORI





CONTENTS


Cover

Title Page

Copyright

Epigraph

Author’s Note

Introduction: Starting Your Inventure

READ AND ENJOY Part 1: Your Spiritual Anatomy 1 Your Inner Journey: The Key to Real Transformation

2 Your True Potential





Part 2: The Center and the Soul 3 The Story of the Soul

4 Mapping the Journey to the Center





DO AND FEEL Part 3: Practice and Attitude 5 The Heartfulness Essential Practices

6 The Secret Ingredient





Part 4: Demystifying the Chakras 7 Chakras: Common Traits and Locations

8 The Four Stages of Flowering of a Chakra





Part 5: Emotional Conditioning—Samskaras 9 The Elephant and the Chair: Conditioning that Binds Us

10 Points A, B, C, and D: The Feeder Factories of Samskaras

11 Cleaning the Samskaras: Correct Thinking and Right Understanding





MEDITATE AND TRANSCEND Part 6: The Heart Region 12 Five Chakras of the Heart Region: The Realm of Opposites

13 The First Chakra: Acceptance

14 The Second Chakra: Peace

15 The Third Chakra: Love

16 The Fourth Chakra: Courage

17 The Fifth Chakra: Clarity

18 Freedom from Freedom: The Gift of the Heart





Part 7: The Mind Region 19 The Mind Region: A Journey to Humility

20 The Sixth Chakra: Selflessness

21 The Seventh Chakra: Stillness

22 The Eighth Chakra: Surrender

23 The Ninth Chakra: Insignificance

24 The Tenth Chakra: Belongingness

25 The Eleventh Chakra: Restlessness

26 The Twelfth Chakra: Settledness





Part 8: The Central Region 27 Entry into the Central Region

28 The Thirteenth Chakra: Nothingness





Conclusion

Discover More

About the Author

Also by Kamlesh D. Patel

Praise for Daaji and SPIRITUAL ANATOMY

Glossary

Heartfulness Resources

About Heartfulness

Notes





Explore book giveaways, sneak peeks, deals, and more.





Tap here to learn more.





O, Sadhu! The one form pervades all.

There is no difference between one drop and another;

The sea and the drop are one.

Sea in the drop and the sea as the drop,

This is the truth.

Behind the drop the sea extends,

The sea supports the drop.

To make the drop realise the ocean

Is all the Reality.

—Ram Chandra of Fatehgarh,

Quest of the Highest Truth—

Hint at the Fourth Stage, Truth Eternal





AUTHOR’S NOTE


The inspiration for this book came in the fall of 2016, when I was in New Jersey conducting meditation workshops. One evening, I had a vision of the sacred anatomy—all the spiritual research on chakras, the energy centers for the evolution of our consciousness—coming together in the form of a book. That night, I wrote the first chapter, and over the next few days I completed the book’s outline.

During the following six years, as I worked on this book, writing many articles on the subject, and conducting training sessions worldwide, I shared the latest research and techniques that were being revealed to me. Spiritual knowledge, like scientific knowledge, is an evolving body of work. As one’s consciousness evolves, the experiences become more profound, and new knowledge reveals itself. Whenever a method or new knowledge descends into my consciousness, I test it with a group of advanced associates and gather their readings. From there, I refine the technique further and expand its usage to a broader audience. All through the process, the hierarchy of masters has guided me and inspired me to continue the work they started in the service of fellow human beings.

Spiritual Anatomy is a comprehensive collection of spiritual research on the soul’s anatomy and journey. The journey commences from the heart, the pulsing center that unlocks the portals of growth and enlightenment. The heart is the inner guide, the real guru on the journey to the Absolute. We are all connected intellectually, morally, and spiritually through the invisible connection of our hearts, weaving us all into a common grand destiny.

The road to that destiny is paved by pioneers. Hidden in plain sight, even from their own discerning minds, the pioneers are catalysts of change. Their silent acts of self-transformation will bring about a tipping point of consciousness that will change the future of humanity. Together their hearts beating as one will advance the way of love that will elevate the human condition from belligerent rhetoric, growing intolerance, and rising inequity. These pioneers represent the tip of the arrow in the silent revolution of consciousness.

And today, I introduce you to one of them: You.

Yes, you, who had the option to attend to that pending chore, catch up with a friend, go for a run, or take a nap, but instead chose to pick up this book. Something moved you to make this choice. Some inspiration echoed between the heart and the mind, and you acted. And your action advances the way of love.

The loving energy produced when you live a life guided by the heart goes beyond yourself. It is like a wave of pure air, capable of enlivening the human spirit. In the way of the heart, to work on oneself benefits the multitude. Individually you may be one, but collectively you are beacons illuminating the darkness, like the stars in a dark sky. The collective action of love-filled hearts from various paths will converge and strengthen the wave that will uplift humanity.

The guiding mantra for Spiritual Anatomy is read and enjoy, do and feel, meditate and transcend. This applies whether you are an avid reader of wisdom books and identify yourself as a regular meditator or you are just starting out on your journey of self-transformation.

Spiritual Anatomy is written to help you achieve your fullest potential and accelerate the tipping point of our collective consciousness. Nothing would give me greater joy than to see you soar into the realms of the Absolute.

Thank you for taking the first step.





INTRODUCTION


Starting Your Inventure


Spiritual Anatomy is the story of an extraordinary adventure where the main character, your consciousness, undertakes an epic voyage to the shores of ultimate reality and steps beyond. For the central role you play in this story, you might call this book the Story of Inventure, your inner adventure. Embarking on the inventure means starting down the path to fulfill the incredible opportunity that human life represents. We come from an infinite source, and our soul, the life force within, embodies that endless potential. Your inventure is the journey to actualize that potential.

Spiritual Anatomy offers an in-depth understanding of the journey of consciousness. It charts a path wherein one can attain levels of consciousness that are usually thought of as unattainable without rigorous practices and extreme levels of sacrifice. Through a simple and natural practice, conditions are created within one’s heart that express themselves in the form of the qualities. Contentment, peace, love, courage, clarity, generosity, and many other qualities blossom in one’s being as their journey progresses. Beyond that, what this journey promises is the flowering of a human being to realize the self and become one with the Source within this lifetime.

The quintessence of nature is simplicity and purity. In your inventure, you come closer to your true nature, and arrive at higher and higher levels of simplicity and purity in your consciousness. The process is simple and natural. Aided by a heart-centered meditation at the core of your inventure, you will find that Spiritual Anatomy is a practical guide with descriptions, maps, tips, and techniques, grouped into three sections: Read and Enjoy, Do and Feel, and Meditate and Transcend. The chapters in Read and Enjoy explore the significance of spiritual anatomy and the origin of the soul. The section Do and Feel provides an overview of the core Heartfulness practices, explains the characteristics of chakras (our centers of spiritual energy), and offers guidance to overcoming the limitations on our consciousness. In Meditate and Transcend, you will find an atlas to the chakras to help you preview experiences and conditions that arise throughout your spiritual journey.

Over the years, I have received many questions from practitioners worldwide, and a select few appear throughout the following chapters. In addition, I have included a self-assessment called The Awareness Atlas. Designed by researchers at Heartfulness, it’s a consciousness scale that can serve as a barometer for self-growth.

While some of the ideas in this book may feel esoteric, there is no reason to take them on blind faith or even belief. Some of you will trust in these ideas because I share them from my experience and direct perception, but what matters most is your own experience. Take a scientific approach, and let the evidence of your own experience guide you—after all, spirituality is the science of the soul. Take the information shared here as a hypothesis and test it out in the laboratory of your heart. Let your practice unveil the gifts of higher consciousness that await you.

With that in mind, I encourage you to keep a journal to record your meditations, take notes, and jot down any questions or doubts that you may have. Understanding comes from experience, and experience comes from practice. And to practice, well, you need more practice. That’s where repetition helps. To further support you, a website, https://www.spiritualanatomy.com, has been created to house links for online classes, color illustrations, and a forum to share your questions. Most of all, I am here to support you. As the spiritual guide of the Heartfulness movement, it is my honor and my duty to accompany the thousands of souls who join us in meditation each day. It would be a joy to share this journey with you and learn from each other. Please write to me at https://www.spiritualanatomy.com, and I can answer your questions. Time is short, the journey is long, and now is the moment.

Good luck with your inventure.





READ AND ENJOY





PART 1





YOUR SPIRITUAL ANATOMY





1.


Your Inner Journey: The Key to Real Transformation


A long time ago, a saint and his disciples showed up at the gates of a kingdom seeking refuge. The guards offered food and water to the guests while another guard ran to inform the king. When the guard reported, the king thought for a moment and asked for a pot of water. He summoned the guard to take the pot and offer it to the saint.

The saint accepted the pot as if he’d been waiting for it. He smiled at the guard and asked for a fistful of sugar, which he mixed into the water. The saint stirred the water to make sure the sugar dissolved, then asked the guard to return the pot of water to the king.

The guard, now thoroughly confused, took the pot and raced back to the king. He offered the pot to the king and was about to speak when the king gestured for his silence. The king asked his minister to taste the water, who sipped and said, “The water tastes sweet, your highness.”

A smile appeared on the king’s pursed lips. “Guard,” he ordered, “usher in the saint and his entourage with the greatest respect.” Then he turned to his minister and said, “Please make sure they are afforded all comforts for their stay and extend the stay for as long as they need.”

If, like the soldier, you are wondering, this is what transpired: When the request for refuge reached the king, he sent a pot full of water to the saint. It was a cryptic message, We are already at capacity. How shall we accommodate all of you?

To which the saint responded, Just as the sugar dissolves in the water and merges with it, we, too, shall integrate into your kingdom and infuse the sweet goodness of virtue and nobility in your people.

The king valued the saint’s wisdom and knew that the presence of the wise soul would ennoble his people.

Within each of us is this same daily struggle between the king and the saint. The king represents the everyday hero, the one with responsibilities, desires, aspirations, problems, wishes, opportunities, constraints, virtues, and vices—all packed into this life. We have so much on our plate that there isn’t room for anything more.

The saint and his entourage represent our higher potential—the possibility of purpose, growth, and evolution that are knocking at the gate of our attention, ready to enhance our life provided we give them a chance. And we do because, deep inside, a voice inspires us to pursue the promise of transformation.

The process of sugar dissolving in the water is the story of integration and merger—the highest ideal of our spiritual lives. The goal of our spiritual anatomy project is to integrate a fragmented existence by merging with higher levels of consciousness and achieve our true potential.

Now, when I say “anatomy,” what comes to mind for you? More than likely, you thought of your physical anatomy. Possibly vivid images from the high school biology textbook of the blue veins, reddish muscle fibers, and ivory-like bones. Physical anatomy is an integrated system of organs working together. Similarly, mental anatomy is a connected system of consciousness, ego, intellect, and thinking that work together to create our ideas and emotions. Much is written about the physical and mental anatomies and how to nurture them. But there is a third, lesser-known system, called the spiritual anatomy. When awakened, this subtle energy system of the soul integrates our physical and mental anatomies, making us one with the universal existence and infusing lasting sweetness in our lives.





Growth Through Integration


The word integration comes from the Latin integer meaning “whole,” “intact.” When you tend to your spiritual anatomy, you integrate your physical, mental, and spiritual anatomies to function in harmony as a unified whole. With integration, there is consonance between what you feel and what you wholeheartedly express. The heart and mind are aligned, and the alignment creates the circumstances for your growth.

Yogic philosophy has a lot to say on the significance of integration. A definition of yoga is “yoga is samadhi.”1 The words yoga and samadhi have multiple meanings, and a popular definition of yoga is “to unite.” Samadhi, commonly understood as ecstasy or trance, is a much grander idea. Samadhi means “the state that prevailed before creation came into existence.” And that was a state of absolute balance, a state of oneness. So “yoga is samadhi” conveys “a state of inner integration where everything is in balance, order, and harmony, resembling the state before creation.”

Imagine yourself in that state of absolute balance, what could you achieve? For a moment, consider the opposite—a state of entropy and imbalance where, lacking peace, the mind is distracted and eventually our life is disjointed and fragmented. Contrast with a state of integration and balance and how that could transform our life.

Growth by integration is a journey in which we incrementally ascend through states of consciousness. It is like a long expedition, with camps for rest and reflection. During those resting moments, we acclimatize to the surroundings and integrate with the environment before proceeding onward. Consolidating what we gathered, as we ascend, our spiritual vision expands from the mundane to the magnificent. This will take time, but interest and effort speed the process.

I refer to this grand journey as the spiritual anatomy project. In Sanskrit, yatra, a sacred journey to the center within, and you, the traveler, are the abhyasi, the one who practices. I also use the words aspirant and practitioner for the abhyasi. No one can force you on the yatra or compel you to meditate. It is a willful undertaking inspired by the heart. But when you do, the heart sets out to speak to you, and you will learn to master the exceptional ability to listen and then muster the courage to abide by the heart’s innate wisdom.

The language of the heart is inspiration. When you meditate on the heart, its inspiration flows through your consciousness, creating ennobling thoughts. But if consciousness is blocked with prejudice and bias—spiritual poisons—the heart’s inspirations cannot achieve their true potential. Think of the mineral kimberlite gushing up from deep in the Earth’s core, cutting through the Earth’s layers. If its path is blocked, it loses speed and gets stuck. But when rising unhindered, kimberlite can furnish a diamond.2

Think of all the year-end resolutions, commitments, unexecuted promises blamed on willpower, a lack of resolve, and a ruinous habit of judging oneself weak. What we don’t realize is that the blocks in our consciousness frustrate our thinking and stall our resolve.

Through the gift of meditation, those blocks can be removed.

When you start your yatra, your spiritual anatomy project, you begin unblocking your consciousness. As a result, the heart’s impulses flow more freely, inspiring feelings that create positive thoughts of growth and change. Your thoughts are the mind’s feedback to explain, interpret, and rationalize your feelings.

For example, when you feel upset after receiving criticism, your thoughts help you rationalize it by thinking, “I’m hurt because I put in a lot of effort and expected praise.” Similarly, when you’re excited about a vacation, your thoughts can interpret this emotion by saying, “I’m thrilled because I need a break and have been looking forward to exploring a new place.” In both cases, your thoughts provide cognitive feedback to explain and interpret your feelings.

Feeling is the cause, thought is the effect, and action is the result. “I think therefore I am” is preceded by “I feel therefore I think.” Your spiritual anatomy project works from the center to the circumference: You don’t simply change on the outside, you transform from within.

What happens when there is real inner transformation? Instead of seeing a glass as half full or half empty, you see the possibility of the glass designed for twice the capacity. New perspectives emerge, your field of action expands. You perform growth-oriented actions that feel good, encourage you, and create more inspired feelings.

Let’s revisit the sequence:

Inspirations from within Change your feelings Change your thinking Change your actions

As your consciousness is unblocked and evolves, you create a virtuous loop of inspired feeling stoking positive thought resulting in purposeful action—a transformation engine. When this engine starts revving, you arrive at a new awareness that makes you realize a conscious purpose and meaning in life, and you work toward that end. You no longer resist life experiences; instead, you imbibe the lessons from the roadblocks you face.

The result of such a transformation is happiness.

For perhaps the first time in your life, you experience happiness that is no longer conditional, that doesn’t demand a material incentive. Your happiness is a settled and centered state of being. When you arrive into this happiness, you realize the elementary difference between happiness and pleasure, the McNugget variant of happiness. Nothing amiss with pleasure! We dine at fine restaurants, delight in the company of friends, enjoy a vacation, all of which bring temporary joy to our lives. We like pleasure. Sometimes quite a lot! But we crave happiness.

Discovering the conscious experience of lasting happiness is an early step in the journey toward integration. You soon discover the mechanisms of inner peace, compassion, and joy leading to sublime levels of happiness of extraordinary worth because that kind of inner peace is sustainable. What I am sharing here is a matter of experience, and you can witness it in your own journey in a short period of time. Such are the results you get from working on your spiritual anatomy.

You may be glad to know that the evidence of science and the wisdom of meditation point to the same truths. In her book, The Awakened Brain, Dr. Lisa Miller describes her cutting-edge research on the science of spirituality using MRI studies, genetic research, and epidemiology. About the benefits of working on one’s spiritual core, she writes, “We begin to live beyond a ‘pieces and parts’ model of identity and a splintered, fragmented view of who we are to one another, and to cultivate a way of being built on a core awareness of love, interconnection, and the guidance and surprise of life.”3 The journey from the limited idea of individual self to feeling the universal connection we share with creation to becoming one with creation is the journey of consciousness.

In the future we will see and more and more that science and spirituality echo the same message: Working on the spiritual anatomy evolves our consciousness. An evolving consciousness infuses greater meaning and purpose into life and helps in achieving our true potential. So how can you move in this direction? How do you commit to the spiritual anatomy project with the devotion it requires? Willingness and interest are the keys.





What’s Needed from You?


A bird needs both its wings to fly straight. To lead a life of growth and purpose, integrate the spiritual and the worldly life by making everyday acts of life spiritual. Infuse your spirit, your heart, into everyday acts. When you speak, speak from the heart. When you look at someone, look with compassionate eyes. When you see a family enjoying a meal, offer a silent prayer for their well-being. When you see people suffering, help.

The world is starved of hearts expressing themselves with generosity and nobility. Your spiritual actions are silent, heroic gestures that touch the hearts of others. The spiritual anatomy project starts with you, from where you are in life. The responsibilities of family, work, and community are the training ground for love, acceptance, sacrifice, and forgiveness, the foundations for your growth.

All you need are willingness and interest. When you practice of your own volition and invest in self-transformation, you integrate your life with the energy of your soul. You elevate the role of your heart from a biological pump to the vehicle of consciousness.

If you are curious about spiritual anatomy, this book will still serve you well. If you are only interested in the basics of meditation to improve your focus, manage stress, and develop better habits, this book has great resources for you, too. This is your project, and you decide the trajectory you want.

I am here to help. The journey can be long, and it would be nice to have friends along the way. My life’s mission is to prepare love-filled hearts blooming as celestial spiritual flowers in the diverse garden of humanity and living fearless, inspired lives. This book is a sincere effort to fulfill that mission, and I hope it inspires you to follow the path of self-realization.





THE AWARENESS ATLAS


If you want to drive from San Francisco to New York City, the simple instruction to drive east may be enough to get you started. But as you progress on the journey, you require more detailed directions, information about places to stay, scenic spots along the way, and so on. The journey from generic to specific is a natural progression.

Similarly, the spiritual journey starts with a general level of self-awareness. As our consciousness evolves, our awareness becomes more refined. We develop precision in understanding the nuances of our inner journey. We experience deeper levels of fulfillment and connection.

The Awareness Atlas is a tool for you on the inner journey. Carefully designed by a team of researchers at Heartfulness, this set of twenty-three questions is an aid for self-reflection. I invite you to take this questionnaire now so that you can reflect on your starting place and then return to it once or twice a year as a check on your growing awareness. This may seem, in some ways, like an opportunity to evaluate yourself, but please think of the questionnaire as a chance to uncover your blind spots. After all, without awareness, we cannot grow.


Taking the Questionnaire

Find a quiet place to answer these questions. It shouldn’t take you more than ten to fifteen minutes. I recommend recording your answers in a journal, though a copy of the questionnaire is also available for download at https://www.spiritualanatomy.com. As you read each statement, reflect on how you have behaved over the past two weeks, rather than whether you agree or disagree with the statement and place a checkmark in the appropriate box.

As an example, one question reads, “I accept the struggles and lessons in life.” You would consider the challenges you accepted and those that troubled you over the previous two weeks, then select your answer.

One note: A few of the questions ask about the “wisdom of the heart.” The term “wisdom of the heart” refers to the wisdom that dawns when you rise above the noise of thoughts, desires, judgments and emotions.





Reflecting on the Answers

Remember, your responses are not good or bad, but rather an opportunity to develop a keener awareness of where you are. If you are as objective as possible, your answers for each question can give you a sense of those areas where you might want to focus attention and grow through your spiritual development.

For example, you may notice that you are only “occasionally” aware of your reactions to others at the time of an interaction (question 3). As your journey progresses, you can revisit the questions to see what has changed. You may, for example, find that now you are “frequently” aware of your reactions at the time of interaction, suggesting a gradual increase in your awareness of others—a sign of the compassion that blossoms naturally through your journey inward.

In other cases, your score may decrease over time as you become aware of the deeper meaning of the item at hand. For example, at the start, you might give a score of “frequently” to question 18—“I cheerfully adapt to life circumstances in order to grow.” As your journey continues, you might develop a greater appreciation for the need for cheerful acceptance and realize that there is room for improvement. Thus the next time you complete these questions, you might score some items as “occasionally” or even “rarely,” indicating that you now have a greater awareness of subtle but important aspects of your reaction to life’s circumstances. The going down of scores can also be interpreted as the bending of the branches of a tree laden with fruit. The more you have grown, the more you yield.

The questionnaire and your answers become mile markers on your voyage of consciousness. Every once in a while, return and answer these questions again. How does this help? You may have noticed that when we reread a wisdom book, we discover something we missed before. A new idea, a new concept, or a deeper understanding. The book hasn’t changed; you have. Like that, your entries over time will reflect the distance you have gone in your Inventure.





2.


Your True Potential


Once, there was a king who had three sons. The king wished to choose an heir who was wise and would take care of the people. So he built three palaces and asked each son to decorate one. The king announced that the people would choose which palace looked the best. But there was a catch: The decoration budget was five copper coins. With such a puny budget, how could one decorate an entire palace?

Angered by the ridiculous ask, the first son scattered bales of hay, bamboo, and straw to show his contempt. The second son thought over the problem for a little longer. He commissioned a local artist to draw charcoal sketches of the king and placed them in every room. The third son sat in the palace in silence. He prayed for guidance to understand the meaning and purpose behind the test. Above all, he wanted to see his father smile.

The answer came, and he placed candles and incense sticks all over the palace. He had some money left over, so he got a sign painted that read, “House of the People.” By evening, when the people visited the palaces, everyone was drawn to the golden glow of the candle-lit palace. When they read the sign outside, they brought flowers, carpets, and furniture. Within hours the palace was decorated, and the people helped the king choose the rightful heir.

We all have limited capital, and that capital is time. It doesn’t matter whether you are rich or poor, literate or illiterate, young or old; everyone grapples with time poverty. The five copper coins exemplify the idea of time poverty—lots to be done and not enough time. The actions of the third prince show what’s possible when we discover a greater purpose and meaning in life and work toward fulfilling that potential.

Life is an opportunity to fulfill our potential. Sadly, most of us remain as potential, a seed that never germinates to become a flower. Flowering in a human being is what we call realization. In order to flower, we must become vulnerable, authentic, and open to change. Perhaps now you see why so many of us choose to remain seeds: We’re protected by that outer shell—the shell of ego and comfort. So, unless we break through the shell of ego and comfort, we do not transcend the limitations and become limitless.

The spiritual anatomy project unlocks your limitless potential. We work on the body for physical growth, and the laws of biology limit the body’s growth potential. The mental realm has more growth potential than the physical. But here, too, after a while, you hit a ceiling for various reasons like age and a slowing learning curve. Compared to the body and the mind, the soul embodies limitless potential. Think of it this way. Between a block of ice, a gallon of water, and water vapor, what has the greatest potential to expand, to grow? It’s water vapor. The subtler the medium, the greater the growth potential.

Now, I want to clarify that when I talk about your potential, I don’t mean your potential for achievement—to succeed in your job, to buy the right house, to marry the right person, to complete a dozen marathons. I am talking about your inherent potential: your spiritual capacity. It is the core of what makes you human, and what brings you closer to love and connection.

When we neglect our spiritual growth, we miss the chance to realize our full potential. You may not realize it now, imagining that the opportunity will always be there for you. But I would compare it to the feeling of watching the train pull away just as you arrive on the platform, or missing your flight even after you’ve run through the terminal to make it. You were nearly there. The regret of realizing that you didn’t live up to your potential is a heavy burden on one’s soul.

Studies have shown time and again that in their final days, people don’t regret not working harder in the office or not buying fancy clothes. What they regret is not having poured more love into their lives. They regret not having spent more time with their loved ones and not having their heart thrive in kindness and compassion. They regret the things that they did not attempt.4 More powerful, a study conducted in 2018 found that most people regret not taking actions that would have made them their ideal selves.5

What do we mean by the ideal self? This is the part of us that hopes, dreams, and aspirations are made of. Achieving goals gives us satisfaction, but when we discover our real purpose and march toward it, our ideal self finds its true fulfillment. The light of an awakened heart guides us in this effort. Like the prince who took some time to interiorize himself in the heart and then found his purpose, working on your spiritual anatomy helps you actualize your potential.





The Soul and Its Systems


When scientists want to explain the building blocks of the material world, they look to the periodic table. That table is an integrated system for classifying elements by atomic weight, atomic number, and elemental properties. The Spiritual Anatomy, too, has building blocks that we can quantify: The Soul and its components, the chakras, koshas, and subtle bodies. Let’s define each one of them, starting with the soul.

To answer the question “What is the soul?” let’s go to the beginning of a person’s life, the time of birth. Have you seen a baby being born? Even if you haven’t seen a birth, you might have heard a newborn announce her arrival into the world. It’s a soft cry that’s so full of life and so sweet that its memory is etched in the hearts of most parents. But if the baby does not cry, that silence is brutal. Doctors rush to help. After their efforts, if the baby still does not cry, then the family cries out in grief.

Why did the baby not cry? Because something that needed to accompany the body at birth, something that triggers the body into action, was missing. The missing entity is the life force. The energy that makes the difference between the living and the dead. The life force keeps you going until the moment it decides to leave the body.

When there is no life force, there is no life experience. Your mind and body function because of the life force. There are many names by which cultures identify the life force, including soul, spirit, atma, ruuh, and neshameh. One that stands out to me is the name Kaaran Sharir in Sanskrit, meaning “the causal body,” the cause for your existence. The soul is the subtlest part of your being, the part with the highest potential.

Chakras, which are the centers of the soul’s spiritual energy, are the key focus of this book. Koshas are the sheaths around the soul, and there are five of them. Subtle bodies are many, and the four most important ones are thinking, intellect, ego, and consciousness. The chakras are the centers of the soul’s energy, distributed through the body. You can think of chakras, subtle bodies, and koshas as the organs of the soul, working together as one integrated system.

In the spiritual anatomy project, we focus on the chakras. For one thing, they encapsulate the subtle energy that powers our transformation. But more importantly, the energy of the chakras pervades the entire spiritual anatomy. It’s like having many lights connected to one dimmer switch: When you turn on the switch, all lights turn on at the same time. When you increase or decrease the dimmer, all of them respond.





Chakras: A Brief Overview


Just as a river, in its descent, forms waterfalls, channels, and tributaries, the soul, after incarnating in the body, expresses itself at various locations known as chakras. The chakras are the spiritual energy centers of the soul, and there are many of these whirlpools spread across the body.

One way of looking at chakras is to treat them as we do the longitudes and latitudes on a map. We don’t see the lines, but we can pinpoint a physical location using the coordinates. Similarly, chakras are energetic entities in the spiritual anatomy, and we can locate their positions on the physical frame.

The most general consensus is that that there are seven chakras. Besides yogic literature, texts in Jainism, Buddhism, and Sufism contain descriptions of chakras, though each tradition points to a different number. These are not contradictions or disagreements. These are maps of consciousness drawn by the revered teachers of these paths according to the problems they were looking to solve, so they charted maps and offered contemplative practices.

One of the key contributions of Heartfulness to the spiritual traditions of the world is the identification of sixteen chakras (three along the spine and thirteen more along the chest area and in the head) through which one progresses to achieve the highest levels of consciousness. This, combined with a set of practices suited for today’s times, makes Heartfulness a simple and effective system for anyone interested in self-development.





Our Goal: The Evolution of Consciousness


Often when you read about chakras, you also read about how one can acquire mystical powers to perform miracles and develop superhuman abilities. Levitation does, admittedly, sound fun, but the quest for mystical powers is not our goal. Our goal is to evolve our consciousness, to discover greater meaning and purpose in life, and to achieve our highest potential. Through our spiritual journey, we progress from a human to a humane to a divine level, and ultimately transcend even that.

It’s a grand project and one that is exclusive to human beings. What makes human life special is the opportunity to grow one’s potential willfully. The caterpillar grows into a butterfly, even if it does not wish to. Its inbuilt genetic design will make it what it ought to be. But for human beings, it’s different. We grow physically, mentally, and spiritually, and our growth across these dimensions comes from the choices we make and the actions we take. The freedom to evolve is exclusive to human beings, and that’s why across traditions, human life is celebrated as a gift.

There are many paths that can foster one’s growth and evolution. One path I confidently recommend is the Heartfulness Way and its practices. You may already be following some other system, and the techniques I share here are complementary. You can adopt them along with whatever else you may be following.

The role of the essential practices (which you’ll learn in chapter 5) is to create the conditions for the chakras to enliven. Think of enlivening a chakra as a flower blossoming from a bud. As chakras enliven, the subtle bodies evolve. The ego becomes humbler, intellect transforms into wisdom, and thinking evolves into feeling. The koshas, the sheaths around the soul, are also transcended. The net result: Your consciousness evolves, and the soul’s potency grows. We do not act directly on consciousness—our body benefits when we work on the arms, legs, chest, and core muscles. Similarly, consciousness is a beneficiary of the work done on the systems of the soul.

As our consciousness evolves, our range of awareness widens, and our perception is refined. With the help of refined perception, we make better decisions in life that are growth oriented. The qualities of the heart take center stage and benefit us in day-to-day life. For example, if you are a manager, you become a better listener and lead your teams with greater success. If you are a homemaker, your poise will create an enriching environment at home for your family. If you are a teacher, you create a receptive classroom learning environment. In this way, qualities like acceptance, peace, love, courage, and clarity begin to blossom in your life, and you become resilient.

There is a flip side also to growing awareness. We start seeing everything as it is without veils. We come face-to-face with everything within us, we see the beauty and the ugliness, we see the opposites and the paradoxes, we see the summit and the abyss within. It can be overwhelming to confront our innermost thoughts and experiences, and it’s one of the reasons why people don’t like to meditate. It’s the story of “Mirror, mirror on the wall.…” When something ugly shows up, breaking the mirror won’t help. It’s not the fault of the mirror. It’s not the fault of one’s consciousness.

Once you anchor in the heart and embark on the spiritual anatomy project, you tap into the abundant resources of the heart. Courage, strength, and tenacity begin to develop. The moment we are ready to change, all of nature’s forces come together to help us transform. In the process, we become the extended hands of Mother Nature. Not that she needs our help, but she likes to see her children like her: limitless. The spiritual anatomy project takes you from the finite to the infinite, from the ephemeral to the eternal, and from a limited consciousness to the limitless Absolute: the Center.





ASK DAAJI


I come from a religious background, Daaji. We pray regularly and celebrate religious holidays. Do I need to stop these practices to be successful in growing spiritually?

All religions teach about the concept of God’s omnipresence, love, and the idea that we are all children of God. The question is not about teachings or observation of belief; the question is about experience. Religions teach, and spirituality helps you experience those teachings firsthand. Do we feel the presence of a higher power? Do we feel universal love? Do we truly believe in the depths of our hearts that we are a part of something much grander?

The tools for experience are meditation, contemplation, and prayer. The Buddha, Jesus, Nanak, Mohammed—all meditated to experience the truth. Your religious practices and the spiritual practices of Heartfulness are not in conflict. When we work on our spiritual anatomy, we progressively experience the truth in our hearts.

It’s important to respect the religion we were born into, but it’s also crucial to take the next step toward diving into the ocean of spirituality. The yatra takes us from religion to spirituality, from spirituality to reality, from reality to bliss, and from bliss to nothingness.





PART 2





THE CENTER AND THE SOUL





3.


The Story of the Soul


When the heart is at peace, the mind is at ease. Your spiritual anatomy project channels the hallmark quality of the soul: peace. In this peace, you begin the journey to return to a state of inner balance, order, and harmony, similar to the state before creation, the original state. At times, we wonder what the original state was before creation.

Imagine this. You are standing in an open field under a crystal-blue sky. Trees dot the meadows around you, and you hear a stream bubbling nearby. From this setting, crop out all the trees, the meadows, and the stream. Now what do you see? Vast stretches of land and the blue sky. Now imagine all the land is gone, the entire planet disappears. You are floating in the cosmos amid the ethereal glow of stars and the cosmic hum of the galaxies. Now, make the cosmos disappear. All the stars, galaxies, and other celestial bodies are gone. Nothing remains. There is no light or matter around you. All around is the infinite nothingness of space enveloped in indescribable darkness and pristine silence. This was the original state before creation. A state of perfect balance and total integration, exemplified in the idea of “yoga is samadhi.” From the original state, creation burst forth.

Your spiritual anatomy project is an endeavor to re-create the original state within yourself. A state of absolute peace where there is no entropy of emotions. A settled state of pure being where you are one with the universal existence, free from all contradictions. It’s a life of balance, inspiration, and excellence. Such human beings, centered in the highest, personify the promise that human life represents.

We become one with the original state by merging with it. For two entities to merge, they need to be the same. An oil drop can never merge with the ocean. It will only float on the surface. A tree will never merge with the sky no matter how tall it grows. To merge with the infinite Source, you need to become infinity, too. The final merger is the coming together of two infinities. Imagine how much you have evolved to arrive at that infinite state. You become infinity itself.





The Center: The Source of Absolute Vibration


How did creation come forth from the original state? Through direct perception in a state of superconsciousness, the teachers of Heartfulness observed that in the original state, there existed the Center. The entire creation was merged in the Center in the most subtle form. A single egg contains the entire human being in a subtle form, and the seed contains the tree in a subtle form; so did the Center contain within itself the seed for the entire creation. The seed was in the form of absolute vibration.

Here is a way to think of absolute vibration from the perspective of energy and matter. Matter is made of the finest subatomic particles like quarks, hadrons, leptons, and so on. These particles are so subtle that they resemble waves of energy more than matter. They have a directional spin that decides their charge and mass. For example, two up quarks and one down quark make a proton. Take two down quarks and one up quark, and you get a neutron. Combine the atomic Legos of two protons and two neutrons, and you get a helium nucleus. Sprinkle a few neutrinos into the mix, and you have a helium atom. We know that atoms come together to form molecules, which then form compounds. In summary, the wavelike subatomic energy fused together in countless combinations to create matter in its infinite forms.

But what created the wavelike subatomic energy? The raw material that created it must be something even subtler and more essential. Something that’s absolute vibration created the subatomic energy, which in turn became material energy, and then became matter. The Center is the source of absolute vibration. The absolute vibration facilitated the creation of energy that then became matter.

Science shows us how energy converts into matter through Albert Einstein’s famous equation E = mc2, and matter converting into energy is a common observation: wood burning to create heat, food getting digested to give us energy, and so on.

Your spiritual anatomy project is a way to experience how energy transforms to its absolute. In your yatra through the chakras, you transcend material vibrations and move to subtler states of consciousness. Along the way, you gather evidence of the transformation from matter to energy to the Absolute occurring within you.





The Moment of Creation and the First Mind


In the original state, the Center was present. Beneath the Center, there was latent motion. Think of latent motion as the potential for motion—the coils of a wound spring that contain all the potential of motion within itself. In that latent motion, one more thing was present. It was the idea of creation. The idea of creation is referred to in Heartfulness as the stir, or Kshob. For creation to begin, a pulse, a trigger, was needed. A switch is to be turned on to complete the circuit. Kshob, or the stir, was the switch.

At the time of creation, the stir triggered latent motion, and the revolutions created crevices in the Center. From the crevices absolute vibration burst forth and started flowing outward. Into the vast nothingness of space, the absolute vibration of the Center was unleashed.

Imagine the immensity of the first wave of creation. When nothingness was infused with absolute vibration, it resulted in a celestial bonanza of creation. The first wave created what is called in Heartfulness the First Mind.i

The currents of absolute vibration began flowing through the First Mind.

The soul originated at the moment of creation. The First Mind ushered in the currents that led to all creation, including the soul. The moment of creation is also the moment of the soul’s separation from the Center. If you think about it, the principle of creation always includes the idea of separation. When a mother gives birth to her baby, it is a creative act, but it is also an act of separation. The mother and the baby were one, but after birth they have become two distinct entities. In similar fashion, after creation, the soul became separated from the Center.

Suddenly alone as a pure and separate entity, the soul looked around and said, “I am.” The feeling of “I” was created from that time, and it continues. As the soul looked around, it feared. Fear is created from the illusion of estrangement and the feeling of I-ness. Fear was the first impression to be deposited on the soul.

The soul, being a part of the Center, inherited the same stirring force that triggered creation. In human beings, this force was inherited in full potency, and it manifested in the form of the mind. Other living things also have a mind, but the human mind is unique because of the potency it absorbed from the Center. The human mind can turn the spotlight of attention inward and redirect the course of inner growth. Minerals, microorganisms, plants, and animals all have some level of intelligence, but the human mind is distinct because it can evolve willfully.

Now, the soul equipped with the mind existed as a separate entity, and over time the idea of estrangement from the Center strengthened in the soul. In the months following birth, the newborn child depends on the mother for everything. But over time the child starts acquiring a sense of independence. Young children mimic their parents. They dress like Mom or Dad, have make-believe conversations and tea parties. Similarly, the soul mimicked the Center and got busy with its own creation with the help of the mind. The soul’s activity fostered the maturing of the subtle body, which consisted of consciousness, ego, intellect, and thinking that enveloped the soul.

The working of the mind began to contribute further layers around the soul. With each added layer, the feeling of estrangement between the soul and the Center kept growing. Now, the human being exists in the physical form, consisting of the physical body, the subtle body, and the soul. The pure awareness of the soul filters through the layers of the physical and subtle bodies. There was a time when you had an unobstructed view of the mountains, but now you see the mountains from behind the clouds and smoke, wearing three or four pairs of sunglasses. As layers got added, pure awareness became blocked, and what was once just a feeling of estrangement from the Center became a reality. Though most of us no longer feel the embodied reality of our connection, we are souls, part of the Center, covered in mental and biological layers.

I use the words Source, Absolute, and Ultimate as synonyms for Center to avoid the monotony of language, but I prefer the word Center because it signifies an inward journey and is apt for the spiritual anatomy project.

In meditation, I once tried to observe the moment of creation. I found myself riding on the first wave, and I slipped deeper and deeper into meditation, so much so that within minutes, I was drowned and could no longer observe. The first wave was so immense that even witnessing it became impossible. Even though it was unleashed billions of years ago, the first wave continues to expand, creating new galaxies, planets, worlds, and souls.

If the idea of an expanding Universe sounds like the physics of cosmology, you’d be right. Even the idea of a stir in the Center that triggered an imbalance and led to creation finds close parallels in physics. James Cronin and Val Fitch in the 1980s were awarded the Nobel Prize for their discovery of asymmetry between quarks and antiquarks. It was the tiniest asymmetry in the balanced state that then led to further steps in creation.

Similarly, elder saints across cultures have left behind works that touch upon the idea of creation and dissolution of the Universe. Yogic philosophy mentions that the current Universe is one of many cycles that will eventually dissolve and give rise to the next cycle. This view is now becoming more mainstream in physics, too, with the idea of the “Cyclic Universe” theory. According to this theory, the Big Bang was not the beginning of time but the bridge to a past filled with endlessly repeating cycles of evolution, each accompanied by the creation of new matter and the formation of new galaxies, stars, and planets.6

Many of the teachings that have been handed down for centuries are spiritual truths revealed through direct perception. These truths find close parallels to theories posited by scientists. I do not see them in opposition. Many concepts from science are evidencing long-held spiritual wisdom, and however you come to this information, it points to the existence of a center from which all action emerged. Science and spirituality both reinforce the idea of consciousness as something beyond matter and the physical body, a nonmaterial vibration that propels us forward and directs the course of our lives.





The Soul’s Origin and Your Spiritual Anatomy Project


Think of the soul’s story from the perspective of consciousness. The soul was a drop separated from the Source. From the time when the soul was pure consciousness, aware of its true nature, to today, when the soul needs to be reminded of its real home, it would seem that we have lost our way.

But here is a more inspiring view of the whole affair. Let’s say your father gave you a million dollars and said, “Go and invest this capital. Make something of it.” After many years, you go back with a hundred million dollars and your father is delighted with your growth. Like that with your spiritual anatomy project, you can go back and merge with the Center, with a more potent soul. But Daaji!, you might protest, I could also lose all the money and disappoint my father. Is it not better to keep the million dollars? And you are right. When it comes to money, winning, losing, and becoming greedy are real possibilities.

But in the soul’s march to the Center, there is no winning or losing. There is only doing. And when you do, the Universe supports your intentions and rewards your progress because you are now aligned with nature’s evolutionary plan. With each meditation, you rekindle the soul’s memory of the original state. In the depths of meditation, the soul speaks to you. Through its marquee silence, the soul inspires you and guides you. And each time you follow its inspirations, you are filled with unexplainable peace and happiness. Through incremental experiences of profound peace and happiness, you realize the innate craving of the soul to become one with the Center.

And the keyword is realize. Knowing “I am the soul” is a logical conclusion. Believing “I am the soul” is blind faith. But realizing that “I am the soul” is something fantastically profound. That’s why in spiritual literature across cultures, the highest goal is self-realization, not self-knowledge or self-belief. As you go inward, the realization strengthens, and you reach higher levels of integration. From strength to strength, you add to the potency of the soul.





Footnote


i In yogic literature, the First Mind is called purusha and creation is referred to as prakriti. The idea of the First Mind is found in many religions and referred to by many names: Supernatural, God, Para-Brahma, and so on. I use First Mind because it is not bound to a certain religion or sect. It is not confined to forms. And it helps us look beyond an attribute-filled, judgment-dispensing God.





4.


Mapping the Journey to the Center


In May 1972, in Greve Strand, a town thirty kilometers south of Copenhagen, the local radio station aired an interview. A spiritual teacher was visiting from India, teaching the Danes how to meditate. Many in town found the idea intriguing, and two young journalists named Michel and Toni (Michel sporting long sideburns and both wearing bell bottoms) showed up for the interview. The man they were interviewing was Ram Chandra of Shahjahanpur, my teacher and guide. He was addressed as Babuji (meaning “respected sir”) by his students.

Michel started the interview with the question, “What is the purpose of a human being, of human existence?”

“The purpose is only realization, or to realize one’s own nature, which is divine,” replied Babuji.

This led to a conversation that delved into questions like “Does divine nature make us God?” “What are we supposed to do as humans?” “Will civilization end?” and so on. Around fifteen minutes into the interview, Michel, who was curious to learn more about Babuji, asked, “And now may I ask you another question? It may be a silly question, too, but can you explain who you are?”

“I am what I ought to be,” replied Babuji.

I wasn’t there in person when the interview happened, but I have heard the recording many times. Each time I listen to it, I can hear how Babuji’s answer, charged with precision and wisdom, changed the energy in the room. Bravos and ahas from those in the room can be heard in the background. The interview continued with questions on humanity, creation, and nature, until Michel looped back and asked, “Babuji, who am I?”

“You are what you are,” replied Babuji.

Again, a precise answer with so much to unpack. The interview, which was in a good flow now, abruptly ended. The reason: Michel and Toni ran out of tape! I can’t think of a better place than the abrupt ending to continue our discussion.

Consider these two statements, inspired by Babuji’s answers: “I am what I am” and “Am I what I ought to be?”

The statement “I am what I am” helps you take stock of where you are. It points out the status quo. The question “Am I what I ought to be?” challenges the status quo. It points toward the horizon. The “ought to” is not the pressure from society or family to conform to or become something. It is the calling, the inspiration from within, to lead an authentic life. When you undertake the soul’s journey to the Center, you begin to infuse your spirit into everything you do. You become more aware, responsible, and dutiful. Not that you were not all this before, but now the light of the soul infuses a different beauty into life. You bridge from what you are now, to who you ought to be: the truest expression of your potential.





In your duties as a teacher, a homemaker, a salesperson, a captain of industry, a doctor, a son, or a soldier, you realize the soul’s plan at work. You appreciate the lessons you learn in the school of life and live with the depth that comes from authenticity. Sometimes in the past, your duties might have felt like burdens, but now you know the purpose they serve in your evolution. Your thinking changes. Your gaze shifts. As spiritual teacher and author Eckhart Tolle put it, “Life will give you whatever experience is most helpful for the evolution of your consciousness. How do you know this is the experience you need? Because this is the experience you are having at the moment.”7

In the chapters so far, I wrote about the story of creation, the Center, the soul’s purpose, and the evolution of consciousness. There is a lot to process. In times where using voice-guided maps is second nature to most of us, the idea of journeying to an unknown destination, the Center, without a map or any visual tool can seem abstract and even overwhelming.

Here is where the spiritual research of Heartfulness helps us. In this book, I share the research on sixteen chakras that form the map the soul brought with it. It’s the map to trace the soul’s journey back to the Source. If one can practice as prescribed, these sixteen chakras blossom and raise one’s consciousness to the original state. Following the map of the sixteen chakras helps you transcend the esteemed milestones of salvation, liberation, bliss, and other achievements, and takes you back into the heart of infinity, the Center.

The possibility of rising to your highest potential and becoming one with it in this very life, while attending to all your duties and responsibilities, is available. That’s what this path is.





The Map to the Center


When we are on a mountain-climbing expedition, we use a topographical map to study the mountain. From the highest point in such a map, descending altitude is depicted in contour lines. The topographical map also shows the locations of the base camps for the expedition. We rest at these camps to acclimatize our bodies to altitude conditions. So, too, is the ascent of consciousness toward the Center.

Each chakra is a camp where we experience a particular condition, such as contentment, peace, awe, surrender, or belonging. The condition is inherent to the level of consciousness at that chakra. In time, that level of consciousness becomes the new normal for us, showing up in the qualities we exhibit in our behavior.

Babuji created a topographical map of consciousness that we can use as a tool in this journey. It is a map of concentric circles that gives us a snapshot of the journey. The idea of representing the journey in concentric circles has a deep meaning. The circle represents unity, wholeness, and completeness. It is unbroken and continuous with no beginning or end, signifying infinity.

Each chakra is an infinity by itself. One can spend lifetimes just going around experiencing a chakra, like an ocean swimmer who keeps swimming the surface of an endless ocean. The idea of concentric circles represents crossing over from one infinity to another as one transcends one chakra to another, like the pearl diver who dives deeper and deeper in search of oysters.

For your easy reference, you can print a copy of this map from the website and stick it in your study, so it becomes easier to refer to it.

In the map to the Center, you can see Center, the highest point. The bands formed by the concentric circles are levels of consciousness represented by a chakra. For example, between circles 1 and 2 is the consciousness represented by the first chakra, between circles 2 and 3 is the consciousness represented by second chakra, and so on. The energy of most chakras extends only to one circle, but there are chakras whose influence extends to two or three circles. You’ll notice, for example, that chakras 12 and 13 cover many circles, indicating the vast contours of consciousness these two chakras hold.





Another thing to notice is that on the map, bands of circles are labeled to depict a region of consciousness. For example, the Heart Region is a collection of five chakras in the chest and neck. Once you have crossed the five chakras of the heart, you cross the Heart Region. Similarly, the Mind Region covers chakras 6 through 12, and the Central Region is the thirteenth chakra.





Same Map, Different Perspectives: Human, Humane, Divine, and Beyond


At the start of our journey, we exist at the human level of consciousness. For many of us, our initial level of consciousness is instinctive. Our bodily needs like the drive to eat, mate, care for our young, and survive understandably occupy a significant portion of our attention.

By investing our energy into contemplative practices, we direct our focus inward and embark on our journey in the Heart Region. It’s here that we elevate our consciousness from the human level to the humane. As we progress through the Heart Region, kindness, care, and generosity blossom. Our circle of care expands beyond our immediate loved ones to encompass more of creation.

As we continue on our journey, we advance from a humane consciousness to a divine consciousness. Divine consciousness means a level where love guides our actions, and selflessness becomes our nature. When we feel love within our hearts for all creation we experience an enchanting and joyful state. A divine consciousness signifies that we have moved beyond personal attachments and resistances. Divinization of consciousness is a gradual process, and love’s alchemy drives it. It starts at the sixth chakra, the beginning of the Mind Region and continues refining as we progress to higher chakras. Those with a divine nature prioritize balance, exhibit moderation, and epitomize acceptance.

After crossing the Mind Region, one enters the Central Region, the most expansive region of all. Here, all contradictions are dissolved, all polarities settled, and one arrives at the state of universal existence. In the Central Region, consciousness is transcended. Now, one is at the root, which is the potentiality that creates consciousness.

In summary, the map to the Center is the grand design of the spectrum of consciousness that we traverse in our yatra. It highlights the progression from human to humane to divine and beyond. The map to the Center is a useful tool in your daily practice. For example, when you want to know the chakras of the Heart Region or the Mind Region, this map shows it to you. As you go deeper into the topic, this map can become the map of qualities or attitudes one develops. This is a map for you, and you adapt it to your journey. Depending on how you approach your spiritual anatomy project, the map can help you notice “This is where I am” and “Here is where I want to be.”





Your Daily Life and Your Spiritual Goals: They Go Together


Given the vast expanse of the inner journey, you may wonder again whether the journey to the Center is possible within your day-to-day life. Perhaps it feels too lofty or aspirational. You may think, It’s easy for you, Daaji, to believe and experience, since you have devoted your life to practicing Heartfulness and guiding others. But what about me? My life is busy. I have many responsibilities and preoccupations. Is it possible?

It’s a valid concern.

And, to answer it, I’d like to tell you my story.

During the summer break of 1976, when I was nineteen years old, I decided to become a monk. I wanted to get away from all distractions and focus all my energy on self-realization. So, one fine morning, I left home. I had no money in my pocket. My only belongings were the clothes I was wearing—a cotton shirt, trousers, and a pair of sandals. I quietly sneaked out and went to an old temple of Lord Shiva, near the river in my village, as the chosen spot to begin my holy journey.

When I arrived at the temple, I was delighted to see a group of aghori babas resting at the temple. I hadn’t seen aghori babas hang around at the temple before, and I took it as a sign of approval of my decision from the Almighty. All day I hung around this group and I noticed that an elderly person was their group leader, and everyone else took directions from him. By late afternoon, the leader called me to him. Despite his fiery appearance—locks of hair and blood-orange robes—when he spoke, I was surprised by the affectionate voice concealed behind his gruff exterior. When I went closer to him, without asking anything, he said, “Dear son, go back home.”

His voice had enormous confidence and regret. I looked into his eyes, and they were drowned in sorrow. He said, “I have been an ascetic for fifty years and I cheated myself. I have not achieved anything spiritually; now I am a beggar roaming the streets from one temple to another. Even if I wanted to, I could not go back home now. Everyone at home has forgotten me. And suppose I did go back, for all these years of asceticism, I have nothing to show for it.”

I listened to him quietly. He paused for a minute and looked out toward the river. Then gathering himself, he said, “Son, I can see your search is genuine. Go back home and serve your parents. This is not the way for you.”

His wise and practical words struck a chord in my heart. I had no logical argument to refute this man’s life experience. I took his advice and walked back home. After a grand span of twelve long hours, my monkhood ended! I sheepishly slipped back into our home and realized that no one had missed me. They all assumed I was having fun during the summer break! That same year, those prophetic words of the elderly Baba came true. A few months after our encounter, I started on my spiritual path with Heartfulness and have never looked back.

Which is not to say that I just traded one path of ascetic spiritual devotion for another. Remember the image of the bird with two wings: the worldly and the spiritual? I have spent almost five decades on this path, and life has continually offered me opportunities to integrate spirituality into every strand of my life.

In 1981, I arrived in America as an immigrant with twenty dollars in my pocket—the proverbial story of an immigrant landing on the shores of opportunity. Over the years, my wife and I raised a family with two boys, and we had our share of tough times making ends meet. Eventually, I built a thriving business of family-owned pharmacies in New York City. I supported many family members and friends in starting their businesses. What supported all my efforts was my meditation practice. Answers to complicated decisions like managing working capital, ordering inventory, and capacity planning would flash by me in meditation. When patients came to me, I dispensed the medicines and along with it the caring connection that many still remember even though I haven’t filled a prescription now in decades. At home, too, spirituality was the way of life where I discussed deeply spiritual topics with my children, who delighted in such conversations. Like all of us, I faced many problems and uncertainties and continue to do so.

Does my practice eliminate my day-to-day problems? Not exactly. But it gives me the strength and endurance needed to gracefully accept them and learn the life lessons they bring my way.

Across the globe, millions today practice Heartfulness. Everyone has their unique journey, but what’s common is the goal and the practice that takes us there. The practice makes it easier to infuse your heart into all aspects of your life. Centering in the heart, we interiorize ourselves and become loving, accepting, and empathetic. Interiorization, one of the many fruits of meditation, helps us recognize the heart as the central, sacred place one should operate from. In our daily life the heart becomes the habitat for our integrated development.

The secret is finding a practice that integrates seamlessly into your daily life. Understanding comes from experience, and experience comes from practice. The goals you wish to achieve, the answers you seek, and the transformation you want to create are all possible through practice.





ASK DAAJI


I am curious and willing when it comes to evolving consciousness, but I admit that I’m a skeptic at heart. How can I proceed in my journey?

We often think of spirituality in opposition to science, but I do not believe this to be the case. One of the definitions of science is the application of reason to experience. Spirituality is, at its core, an experience, and there is much to be gained by applying the same careful observation and logic to our spiritual lives. You wouldn’t continue a diet plan if it doesn’t help you. You wouldn’t spend time on a course if it didn’t help you improve your skills. Why should it be any different when you work on your spiritual anatomy? Your inner progress should be measurable. For this, we borrow from the scientific method. In the scientific method, we take a hypothesis and then conduct experiments to prove whether the hypothesis is true or not.

Take the same approach to spirituality. Whatever I teach, take it as a hypothesis. Your heart is the laboratory. Experiment there and measure your experience. Arrive at the truth through your own encounters. Till then, it’s only a theory, a belief that you uphold.





DO AND FEEL





PART 3





PRACTICE AND ATTITUDE





5.


The Heartfulness Essential Practices


Heartfulness is precisely the feeling the word evokes: a life guided by the wisdom of love. Where there is love, there is inspiration, enthusiasm, and energy. There is courage and compassion. There is hope and growth. Heartfulness practices imbibe the essence of love. It is a system of Raja Yoga adapted to support the busy and challenging lives that we all lead today. To that end, there is no You must do this or You have to follow this in Heartfulness. The system is designed to align with the body’s natural rhythms and energy flow, helping one progress faster. For this reason, the system is also known as the Natural Path, although the name Heartfulness is more prevalent now.

Heartfulness practices offer self-paced techniques that evolve your consciousness and integrate your spirit into daily life. Each day becomes a day of experience, a day of positive change that creates a microshift inside, which keeps you going further. The essential practices of Heartfulness include relaxation, morning meditation, evening cleaning, and nighttime prayer. (Later in the book you will find supplemental practices to deepen the meditative state and to overcome fear and anger.)

As we have talked about, willingness and interest are the only prerequisites for the practice. If you are someone with good self-discipline, that’s wonderful. But if you are someone dealing with a few blows in life, someone recovering from pain, or some other challenge that dented your confidence, don’t worry. The practices are self-paced and simple, and whatever time you invest, it’s helpful. If you have only ten minutes to meditate, start with that. If you can spare ten minutes in the evening to do your cleaning, do that. If you are commuting to work and feel like meditating, go ahead. This is your practice to fulfill your deepest aspiration. You decide how and when you want to get there.

The Heartfulness practice works in the depths of your heart, inspiring your free will. It ignites an interest in yourself—to become a better person, to become kinder, more generous, more courageous, and more loving. And this transformation usually happens without you being acutely aware of it. You might feel a change taking place within, but it’s only when others point out and remark, “Hey, you’ve changed. What are you up to these days?” Then you ponder over how you have changed.

It’s important to point out that all spiritual training at Heartfulness is offered for free. Since the Heartfulness movement’s inception in the late 1800s, training has been free. One cannot sell spirituality. It can only be shared with whoever is willing. It doesn’t matter which country, caste, creed, or religion you belong to. If the heart is willing, spiritual essence descends into it.





Relaxation


Relaxation offers progressive calming to the body. It also helps empty the vestibules in the body. There are twenty-eight vestibules from head to toe, and they act like dumpsters that collect the excessive blocks within the system. Relaxation empties the vestibules. You can do the relaxation at any time, and it is especially useful before starting meditation.





HEARTFULNESS RELAXATION


1. Sit comfortably and close your eyes softly and gently.

2. Begin with your toes. Wiggle your toes. Now feel them relax.

3. Feel the healing energy of Mother Earth move up into your toes, feet, and ankles. Then up to your knees. Relax the lower legs.

4. Feel the healing energy move farther up your legs. Relax your thighs.

5. Now, deeply relax your hips, lower body, and waist.

6. Relax your back. From your tailbone to your shoulders, feel your entire back relaxing.

7. Relax your chest and shoulders. Feel your shoulders simply melting away.

8. Relax your upper arms. Relax each muscle in your forearms and your hands, right to your fingertips. Feel the energy gently flow out from the fingertips.

9. Relax your neck muscles. Move your awareness up to your face.

10. Relax your jaw, mouth, nose, eyes, earlobes, facial muscles, forehead… all the way to the top of your head.

11. Feel your whole body completely relaxed. Scan your system from top to toe, and if there is any part of your body that is still tense, painful, or unwell, feel it being immersed in the healing energy of Mother Earth for a little while longer.

12. When you are ready, move your attention to your heart. Rest there for a little while. Feel immersed in the love and light in your heart.

13. Remain still and quiet, and slowly become absorbed within.

14. Remain absorbed for as long as you want, until you feel ready to come out.





Meditation


Morning hours are best suited for meditation since starting your day with meditation can help you set the right tone for the rest of the day. Additionally, the body’s energy flow is inward during the early morning hours, and meditation is the act of going inward. So, meditation in the early mornings means you are going with the flow of nature’s currents, and it’s easier to slip into a deep meditation. If you’re not a morning person, don’t worry. You can fit meditation into your routine once you wake up and get fresh. The peaceful state of mind that comes with meditation can help you approach the rest of your day with greater ease and clarity.

Choose a place where you can meditate without being distracted, preferably at the same place and time daily. Fixing a time is especially helpful because it helps you slip into meditation with greater ease. Turn off your phone and other devices. (Yes, all the way off, not just on silent mode.) Sit with your back upright but not rigid. Be comfortable. Gently close your eyes, and if you need to, take a couple of minutes to relax your body using the Heartfulness Relaxation. When you’re ready, turn your attention inward and begin.





HEARTFULNESS MEDITATION


1. Turn your attention inward and take a moment to observe yourself.

2. Then, suppose that the Source of divine light is already present within your heart, and that it is attracting you from within. You are drenched in love, feeling every cell of your being drowned in this subtle vibration, with an attitude of joy.

3. Gently relax into that feeling. If you find your awareness drifting to other thoughts, do not fight them but also do not entertain them. Let them be, while kindly reminding yourself that you are meditating on the Source of divine light in your heart, and direct your mind back to that feeling of joyful presence.

4. Allow yourself to become absorbed within.

5. Remain absorbed within this deep silence for as long as you want, until you feel ready to come out of meditation.





The idea of all yogic practices is to make the mind resonate with the stillness of the soul. When the mind resonates with the stillness of the soul, that is the moment of realization. In that moment, we become whole. We become centered. This centeredness gives one a settled feeling.

A steady and settled mind feels happy. If that settledness is not there, then one keeps jumping from one thing to another without any resolution. There will be no closure, and one is left with a feeling of dissatisfaction and a loss of inner peace. Settledness is the key, and meditation done correctly will automatically make you feel settled.





ASK DAAJI


I have a constant chatter of thoughts going on in my mind. I want to meditate, but I am not sure I can. What do you advise?

One of the most common questions I receive from new meditators is the challenge of thoughts arising during meditation. The mind’s nature is to produce thoughts, just as the eyes are meant to see and the ears to hear. During the day, the constant chatter of thoughts does not bother us that much, but during meditation, we become acutely aware of the disarray created by thoughts. We notice the mind wandering from one idea to another. Meditation helps us appreciate the need to regulate the mind and channel its capacities.

Within a few weeks of Heartfulness meditation, the chatter of thoughts goes down significantly. If thoughts bother you excessively, from time to time, you can try one of these tips:

1. Try doing some breathing exercises before you begin your meditation.

2. If there are many thoughts during meditation, try to pause breathing for a few seconds and then continue the meditation.

3. If thoughts persist, gently open your eyes. Stay seated and take a few deep breaths. Then close your eyes again.



One of the other things I would do is to read some spiritual literature. Perhaps it is a page from this book, some poetry you like, or a particular religious text. Often, it will put your mind in a spiritual space where it is easier to slip into presence with the heart and meditate.





Cleaning


The second pillar of your practice is evening cleaning. It is your detox and rejuvenation routine. At the end of the day’s work, at around sunset time, doing the cleaning helps you eliminate all the emotional complexities and impurities gathered during the day. Cleaning is like taking a dip in a serene pool and rejuvenating yourself. It’s suggested to do cleaning in the evening because at this time the energy flow is outward, so it becomes easier to expel the heaviness from the system.

The key is to have a nonjudgmental attitude toward whatever complexities and impurities are being removed. Simply affirm that all complexities and impurities are being cleaned, and be confident in the affirmation you offer.





HEARTFULNESS CLEANING


1. Sit in a comfortable position with the intention to remove all the complexities and impurities accumulated during the day.

2. Close your eyes and relax.

3. Imagine all the complexities and impurities that are leaving your entire system.

4. Let them flow out from your back in the form of smoke, from the area between your tailbone (at the base of your spine) and the top of your head.

5. Remain alert during the entire process without brooding over the thoughts and feelings that arise. Try to remain a witness to your thoughts.

6. Gently accelerate this process with confidence and determination.

7. If your attention drifts and other thoughts come to mind, gently bring your focus back to the cleaning.

8. As the impressions are leaving from your back, you will start to feel lighter.

9. Continue this process for twenty to twenty-five minutes. Initially you can start with ten minutes and build your capacity.

10. When you feel light within, you can start the second part of the process.

11. Feel a current of purity coming from the Source entering your system from the front. This current is flowing into your heart and throughout your system, saturating every particle.

12. You have now returned to a more balanced state. Every particle of your body is emanating lightness, purity, and simplicity.

13. Finish with the conviction that the cleaning has been completed effectively.





Prayer


There is an experience from Shri Parthasarathi Rajagopalachari’s (or Chariji) time that I want to share. After Babuji, Chariji led the Heartfulness movement. He was a prolific teacher, a relentless worker, and a giant among men. I spent many years under the tutelage of Chariji. Once, while traveling in Europe with him, we were stranded because of a storm and were put up at an airport hotel. Rooms were scarce, and I was in the same room with Chariji. Not to disturb him, I remained quietly in my bed in the morning. I noticed him sitting on the corner of his bed with his eyes closed, and he seemed to be melting away into thin air. Suddenly the atmosphere in the room changed—it was vibrating with a very special energy.

When he was done, I asked, “Master, what were you doing? It was so special. It was unique. I have never seen anything like this with my eyes open.”

“Oh, I was praying,” replied Chariji.

What did I learn from this experience? Chariji was there but not there. He had totally submitted, dissolved himself in thin air. We should offer prayer like that.

Prayer is a state of being, a song that hums in the humble heart. The words of any prayer are but a bridge to lead you into a state of interiorization. In this state one is carried on the waves of love into the depths of the heart, into a union with the higher self.

Before going to bed, take a moment to reflect on your day. Consider what you did well and where you can improve. Make a quiet determination to do better and turn inward for guidance from the Source as you repeat the words of the prayer below. Meditate for a few minutes over the true meaning, feeling the words resonate in your heart.

A few notes here on the use of the word “Master” in the first line of this prayer. It refers to the inner guide, the Source already present within each of our hearts. In the East, people use the words guru and master, more so than in the West. In Heartfulness literature also, you will see these words used. The word master always refers to the source within. The role of a teacher is to help you realize the inner connection you already have.

When I use the word master for my teachers, it is out of my reverence and respect for them. In my eyes, they are masters of spirituality because they mastered the self and integrated spirituality into all aspects of life. Using the word master in this context is no different from using it to refer to a master painter, master sculptor, or master carpenter—all of whom have mastered their craft.

And what about the word guru? It is a Sanskrit word. The literal meaning of guru is “one who dispels darkness.” The guru is someone who dispels the darkness of ignorance through the light of knowledge.

The Heartfulness prayer I share here was conceived in the early 1900s. In deference to the teachers who came before, the language of the prayer has been kept intact, though we recognize that it may be challenging for some. You are welcome to change the word master to Source or God or change slaves to servants if those resonate more for you. I offer it here in its original form with the hope you can connect with the essence of the prayer and benefit from it.





HEARTFULNESS PRAYER


Sit comfortably, gently close your eyes, and relax. When you are ready, repeat the words of the prayer quietly to yourself:

O Master!

Thou art the real goal of human life.

We are yet but slaves of wishes

putting bar to our advancement.

Thou art the only God and Power

to bring us up to that stage.

Now silently contemplate these words a second time and go even deeper into this feeling. Allow yourself to be absorbed in the feeling beyond the words. Allow yourself to melt in this prayerfully meditative state as you go to sleep. In the morning, reconnect yourself by silently offering this prayer once before you start the Heartfulness Meditation.





How to Find a Teacher


If you would like to work with a teacher as you begin your practice, there are three options. All of these are free and available for anyone to use. We would be glad to see you.





Option 1: Learn to Meditate with a Preceptor


Preceptors (or prefects, trainers) are trained to offer instruction in the practice of Heartfulness. Preceptors typically undergo years of training and individual practice, after which they volunteer for this work. The meditation sessions they offer are also called sittings, and they are an essential support for individual meditation as well as group meditations. The key role of the preceptor is to support you in your practice. For example, if you are struggling with intrusive, bothersome thoughts during meditation, you can call a preceptor to get a couple of one-on-one meditation sessions.

If you are new to Heartfulness, I recommend at least three introductory sittings to help you orient to the Heartfulness practices and understand them well. Thereafter, you can also work with a preceptor to receive individual sittings as your schedule permits. No fees are charged by the preceptor. It is a volunteer service. To find a preceptor near you and start the meditation practice, go to https://heartspots.heartfulness.org, and there you can find preceptors in your area.





Option 2: Join the Heartfulness Masterclass


You can join a three-day masterclass online and learn the essential Heartfulness practices. Here is a link for the masterclass: https://heartfulness.org/us/masterclass/.





Option 3: Download the Heartfulness App


Download the Heartfulness app (available on the Apple store and the Google Play store). You can set up your profile on the app and start your practice. When you sign up on the app, first start with the three introductory sessions. After that, you can request individual meditation sessions on the app.





Yogic Transmission: The Catalyst for Your Journey


Seventy-three generations before Lord Ram Chandra of Ayodhya, there lived a great yogi. His name and other details of his life are unknown. What is known of him is that he devoted much of his time pondering over a method that could help human beings achieve freedom from problems and realize their full potential. This yogi was a highly elevated soul, swimming in the Central Region (described later in the book). After pondering long over the subject, the great yogi discovered Transmission.

Transmission can be defined as the utilization of divine energy for the transformation of a human being. I use the word energy because I don’t have a better alternative. Energy has a wide spectrum. The material world is a dense expression of energy in the form of matter. There is a subtler expression of energy that we call life energy, or prana. Then there is a spectrum of energy that remains as it is, unchanged like a catalyst, and enriches whatever it touches. That energy is Transmission, also called pranasya-prana (the life of life) or adi shakti (the original force).

Transmission is the spectrum of energy resembling the absolute vibration that emerged from the Center. Using Transmission, the inner journey is greatly accelerated and helps one make progress that otherwise would have taken hundreds of lifetimes.

Because of Transmission, the merger with the Center—the highest goal—has become possible within one single lifetime. Previously, it would take an untold number of lifetimes to elevate one’s consciousness back to the level of the Absolute.

For reasons unknown, the knowledge of harnessing Transmission for human transformation was lost over time. Maybe the teaching tradition did not spread far and wide. Maybe there was a downfall in society, and this wisdom was lost. Or perhaps Mother Nature’s plans were different, and in due course the knowledge faded away. Whatever the reason, the knowledge of Transmission was lost. Transmission as divine energy would still descend because of the right environment created by saints and devotees through their love and devotion. But this was not the same as having a meditation system designed with Transmission at its core.

For thousands of years, this was the status quo. In 1873, the status quo was disrupted with the birth of Ram Chandra of Fatehgarh. From childhood, he had a deep awareness of his purpose, which was to lay the foundation of a spiritual legacy. His thirst for the divine and unrelenting craving to become one with the Absolute made him an ardent student of the self. It is said that within seven months of rigorous practice, at the age of twenty-one, Ram Chandra achieved self-realization—a feat etched in golden letters in the ethereal records of spirituality. Moreover, Ram Chandra of Fatehgarh rediscovered Transmission and started using it to serve the people who came to him.

The word spread of a guru with whom people meditated and were transformed. Locals from nearby villages began thronging at the gates of the master, who spoke little, asked for no money, did not insist on any orthodoxy, and offered meditation that transformed whoever came. Out of love and respect for him, people began addressing him as Lalaji (meaning “respected sir” in the Hindi language).

After Lalaji, his protégé—who also shared the name Ram Chandra (of Shahjahanpur) and was fondly called Babuji—continued to refine the system. The spiritual partnership of Lalaji and Babuji created the system of Heartfulness meditation, which is a gift for all of us. Today we have a simple system with a universal appeal and that is suitable for a normal householder with many duties.

The research team at Heartfulness is conducting various studies all over the world, in collaboration with scientific laboratories, academic centers, and universities, to measure and explain the effectiveness of meditation aided with Transmission. These are early days, yet we are already seeing promising results from the projects. Studies looking at brain wave patterns in EEGs have shown that Heartfulness meditators (i.e., those who meditate with the benefit of Transmission), both new and seasoned, are able to experience deeper, calmer states when compared to nonmeditators.8 Other studies have also reported reductions in stress and burnout,9 epigenetic modulation,10 and improvements in well-being and sleep quality,11 thus pointing toward the beneficial impact of Heartfulness practices aided by Transmission on human lifestyles and quality of life.

What the science helps us validate, we have already experienced in our own hearts. The conviction of one’s own experience is critical for inner progress and is not to be discounted. Experience helps you cast the veils of belief aside. It unmasks doubts and helps you on the inner journey. Equipped with the practices and an understanding of the goal, the coming chapters of the book will reinforce the mantra: Read and Enjoy, Do and Feel, Meditate and Transcend.





6.


The Secret Ingredient


Once there lived a seer who meditated with great austerity. One day, a young villager was touched to see the seer drowned in meditation. Out of reverence, he bowed and offered his greetings in silence. The seer felt the young man’s presence and opened his eyes. He was pleased to see the young man and asked if he would also like to meditate. The young man was a simpleton, and even though he didn’t know much about the inner journey, he readily agreed. So the seer asked the man to sit under a tree next to him, and guided him through meditation.

As they meditated, a bright ball of energy descended and spoke to them: “Blessed souls, your efforts have knocked at the gates of the Lord, and you both shall be liberated soon.”

Hearing this, the seer said, “Thank you! My prayers have been answered. When will that blessed moment arrive?”

“In the third life from now, you will be liberated, holy one,” said the light.

Hearing this, the seer became downcast. Perhaps he was expecting liberation in this life, maybe at that very moment. Who knows?

The young man then asked, “When will I be liberated?”

“Count the leaves on the tree you are meditating under,” the light said. “It will take that many lives, and your liberation is guaranteed.”

Hearing this, the young man started dancing with joy. The seer couldn’t understand this behavior and asked the young man, “Why are you dancing up and down? What’s the matter with you?”

“Didn’t you hear, sir?” the young man asked. “The Lord just granted me liberation. How does it matter when I get liberated? One day, I will be right up there with the maker.”

As soon as the young man spoke these words, the light said, “Son, your attitude is worthy of the Lord’s court. This life shall be your last, and you will be liberated at the end of it.”

So saying, the light disappeared.





This story has many lessons, but the biggest takeaway is about the attitude with which we approach life. In the case of this story, gratitude transformed the young man’s destiny. In all walks of life, the right attitude ennobles our actions. Your attitude is the secret ingredient to your success.

Be it meditation, writing a letter, or making a sandwich, the attitude with which we work adds a dimension that shapes our inner being. In any task, what we do accounts for 5 percent, and the remaining 95 percent is the attitude with which we do it.

You acquire your attitudes through your upbringing and life experiences. You also inherit some of your attitudes from your parents. You can also actively cultivate attitudes. How you think or feel about something or someone is guided by your attitude. Attitudes are so ingrained in us that we aren’t aware of how they shape our destiny. Your life is an expression of your attitudes.

Your active focus on cultivating beneficial attitudes helps to accelerate your progress in your spiritual journey. Think what happens when you are digging a well for water. You dig from the top and keep digging deeper (outside in), while the water under the earth is also gushing up to meet the surface (inside out). When it comes to your spiritual journey, the outside in is your cultivating attitudes, and the inside out is the meditation practice doing its work. The two work in tandem.

What are some attitudes that we should cultivate? Why these attitudes specifically? There are three core attitudes that will serve you in your journey, which I call the mother tincture attitudes.





The Mother Tincture Attitudes


In some forms of medicine, there is the idea of a mother tincture. It is the base formulation from which other medicines of varying potency are created. The concept of the mother tincture applies to cultivating attitudes also. Some core attitudes are like the mother tincture, from which other attitudes emerge. From the early days of your practice, keep an eye out for developing the core attitudes. It will lay a strong foundation for your inner development. It will also help you in your day-to-day affairs.

The three mother tincture attitudes are:

• Sense of urgency

• Humility

• Liveliness



These three are not in any order of priority. They are all equally important. Whichever appeals to you, set your intention on it. Your intention is the subtle force that activates the will and helps you actively cultivate these attitudes in your day-to-day life. Let’s take a look at each in more detail.





Sense of Urgency


In any endeavor, a sense of urgency is crucial. It is the first step to creating change. Without a sustained sense of urgency, efforts become lukewarm, and complacency sets in. In your journey to the Center, a sense of urgency helps you focus on your priorities. Make a habit of asking yourself this question: “What’s the most important thing to do in this moment?” It will help you re-center and cultivate a sense of urgency toward your goal.

As urgency increases, your eagerness to get to the goal also increases. Questions such as “What am I here for?” “What do I need to do?” and “What is my goal?” become more frequent. Each time these questions surface in your mind, they leave a ripple of restlessness in your consciousness. These ripples linger like the ones on a quiet lake disturbed by a pebble thrown into it. The more your consciousness evolves, the greater the ripples of restlessness. You could say that the spiritual anatomy project is an endeavor of growing restlessness for the goal.

But don’t worry—the restlessness I am writing about is nothing like when you are late for a flight or your takeout is delayed. Neither is it the unhealthy restlessness that leads to anxiety and other problems of despair. This is spiritual restlessness. It propels you toward the soul’s true purpose: to grow and evolve. If you have been in love, recall the restlessness with which you waited for your lover. Amplify this many times, and you can get a whiff of the restlessness I talk about.

The spiritual restlessness created in your meditation finds an ally in the sense of urgency you cultivate. Together, they help you stay focused on the goal. Alertness, initiative, and agility are natural outcomes of a sense of urgency.

Now, be mindful that urgency is not desperation. Urgency is a positive driving force you create, but desperation is a knee-jerk reaction grounded in fear or scarcity. A sense of urgency helps you focus on making progress toward the goal daily, whereas desperation creates a flurry of activity that fatigues you. A sense of urgency helps you counter inner entropy and creates protection against a lukewarm approach to life.





Humility


Humility is the most sublimated state of ego. Humility is not flattery or servility. Instead, humility is a sign of great self-awareness, where you are aware of your smallness in front of a much bigger ideal. Such awareness gives you a feeling of insignificance that helps you grow. A humble person is respectful by nature and cultivates reverence in one’s heart. Just as a tree laden with fruit bends naturally under the weight of its gifts, a human being bearing spiritual fruit becomes increasingly accessible to one and all.

Humility attracts grace. When a low-pressure area is created in the atmosphere, the wind rushes in to fill the void. In the same way, when you create space within by sublimating the ego, you create a low-pressure area in the heart, which is then filled with grace. When there is humility within, grace descends automatically. And grace is a catalyst for inner progress.





Liveliness


Long-drawn faces, gloomy moods, and irritable behaviors stretch the journey. But a song in the heart, a smile on the lips, and a spring in the step make the journey livelier. Cultivate an attitude of liveliness.

Become livelier, more cheerful. Carrying the baggage of sadness, sorrow, and unhappiness will not work. You may be justified in feeling sad. How long would you like to carry that sadness with you? Is sorrow that precious? Is it worth storing it in your beautiful heart and burdening it? And in almost all cases, the reason for sadness will always be another person, who is also God’s creation. So, to bring about transformation, be livelier. Throw away the deadwood that fixates you. Stay pliable in spirit. Emotional and mental flexibility comes from the openness of the heart. A sad, heavy heart cannot stay open. Only a lively heart is open and flowing.





A few years ago, on a summer afternoon, I was driving back home after a meeting with a team of volunteers. This was when the meditation center in Kanha Shanti Vanam was still being built. Today Kanha is a green paradise with gardens, lawns, and even a tropical rainforest. But back then, Kanha was flat, arid ground with glistening quartz and chunky boulders of granite scattered across the landscape. Summers in this part of India (about forty miles from Hyderabad) are dusty and dry, and the summer afternoon on that day was no exception.

As I was driving back to my home in Kanha, a mile away from my office, I saw a group of ten women, volunteers, clearing the gravel on the side of the road. You couldn’t miss them. From afar, their colorful traditional attire stood out like spring flowers in the midst of barren land. As I drove closer, I could see how joyfully they worked, as if the hundred-degree weather didn’t matter. These women came from the same small town from the heartland of Western India.

Their simplicity, devotion, and enthusiasm had created such liveliness. I pulled over and requested them to visit me at home later that afternoon. When they arrived, we sat for meditation. Their hearts had such devotion that it felt as if they were turning the face of the divine their way with the same ease with which one pulls a branch to smell a flower. A few minutes into the meditation, I felt a strong jerk in the Center. Once in a while, it happens that the pitch of someone’s devotion rises so high that it creates a reverb in the Center. It’s rare, like the sighting of a thousand-year-orbit comet, but it happens. But what came next melted me away in love.

Like clockwork, there was jerk after jerk in the Center during our meditation. One after the other, the loving calls from the hearts of these women were echoing in the Center. I hadn’t witnessed this before, and I haven’t seen this happen since.

It was such a moving experience, and after the meditation ended, I requested that they stay on for a little longer. We all had some coffee and spoke for some time. One of my associates took a picture of us. I still have this picture in my study as a reminder of what the innocent purity of hearts can evoke in the highest.

And what was the secret to this momentous experience? Their attitude. Their approach to life and to one another created something that compelled the descent of the highest grace. Their beautiful souls represented the purity and simplicity of their attitudes. If you implement anything from this book in your life, let it be the cultivation of attitudes that ennoble your life.





PART 4





DEMYSTIFYING THE CHAKRAS





7.


Chakras: Common Traits and Locations


My five-year-old granddaughter has these books with vibrant illustrations of carnivals, cityscapes, and other settings. Hidden in these busy images is Waldo, the lanky Brit with his trademark red-and-white-striped T-shirt and blue jeans. On his own, Waldo is unmissable. But when Waldo is thrown in with all the clutter, spotting Waldo is quite a task.

Observing inner changes is much like finding Waldo, but with a big twist. You know what Waldo looks like. But in the inner landscape, you must first learn what to look for. So, in this chapter we will be doing two critical tasks. First, we need to know what we’re looking for, so we’ll learn the most common traits of the chakras, such as their elemental constitutions, colors, movement and vibrations, location, and emotional qualities. Our second task will be locating all sixteen chakras on the body. This will help you correlate the traits of the chakras with their locations. As you engage with the chakras more deeply, these traits will help you tune in more precisely to their energy and the inner states they create. This understanding makes you proficient in appreciating the inner growth. It’s like finding Waldo. Spotting him the first time is tricky, but once you do it, the next time is easier. With each successful attempt, your confidence grows and you enjoy the journey more.





States: Knot, Chakra, and Lotus


When the soul descends into the body, it does so like water descending from a mountain and flowing across the plains. At various points during its descent, the water forms whirls and currents. The soul, too, expresses and collects its energy at various places of the body, which we call chakras. The word chakra means “a wheel,” symbolizing the spinning-vortex-like nature of these energy centers.

Across cultures, there are many terms to describe a chakra. Of particular significance are the terms knot, chakra, and lotus. Each indicates a distinct status of a chakra. A chakra in a bud-like state is called a knot. An awakened chakra that’s blooming with full potential is called a lotus. The image that follows is an easy way to remember the various states of a chakra.

When we talk about spiritual anatomy, we often use phrases like “work on the chakra,” “chakra is touched,” etc., but the “work” on a chakra does not mean we do something to open up a chakra like we would unwrap a gift. It’s more nuanced. Think of how one would tend to a rose plant in the garden. We make sure it has the right soil and enough water, and it’s well protected from bugs. The rose bud receives the warm rays of sunlight and blossoms naturally. We take care of the plant and the bud blossoms on its own. In the same way, when you meditate on your own, in sessions with Heartfulness trainers (preceptors), and in group meditations, work happens on a chakra.





The field around the chakra is cleaned and the intervening spaces between the chakras are cleared. After the field is purified, impulses of transmission are given to a chakra. This allows the chakra to flower, and its energy descends into the heart, creating inner conditions. Cleaning and applying Transmission is a layered process that takes place throughout the spiritual journey. Bear in mind that, often, you will feel the work happening after meditation, as well as during. As their awareness grows, many practitioners notice that even during routine activities like taking a walk or cooking the inner work continues.





POINTS: SPECIALIST CHAKRAS


There is a particular category of chakras that I refer to as points. The points are unique and they hold a specific role in the spiritual anatomy. For example, in our body, the nose plays a specific role in the much larger respiratory system. Like that, points have a specific and crucial role in the larger anatomy. Besides the sixteen chakras, there are four points that we will focus on in this book. Working on these four points helps us build a strong and stable spiritual foundation. Later in the chapter, we will locate the positions of the four points and the sixteen chakras.





The Five Elements and Chakras


Yogic philosophy states that the Universe is made of five elements: earth, space, fire, water, and air. Of course, our modern understanding of matter tells us that certainly there are many more elements than these five. What the elders intended was to observe the five distinct attributes of matter. They made a qualitative observation and not one based on the atomic nature of the elements. Each of the elements represents a unique attribute.

Earth is used to describe solidity.

Air represents movement exhibited by a gas.

Water represents the liquid state.

Fire signifies the attribute of matter to transform from one state to another. (For example, when we heat water, it becomes steam.)

Space is the base, the fundamental material. It was never created; it was always there. It represents the idea of nothingness.



With this understanding, when you look at the human body, you find that we are indeed made up of the five elements. The solidity of the body is the earth element. The various fluids in the body signify the water element. Our breathing is the intake and outflow of the air element. The digestive process of breaking down food into energy represents the transformative attribute of the fire element. All through the body, the space element is present. The space between cells, the hollowness of blood vessels, intestines, and so on—all signify space.

The five elements are not limited to the physical anatomy alone. They also play an important role in spiritual anatomy. Within each chakra, the qualities of the five elements are present, and each chakra has one prominent element. Think of it this way: Pick up a clump of soil and hold it in your hand. The earth element (solidity) is dominant, isn’t it? But trapped in that clump of earth is the air element. Some moisture (water element) is also trapped in the soil. When the sun heats the soil, it bakes and becomes harder, so the transformative quality of fire is also there. And finally, between the particles of soil, the space element is present. Still, as we hold it in our hand, we would recognize its earthiness first. So too, it is for the prominent element of a chakra.





Conditions at a Chakra


Of all the traits we cover in this chapter, understanding the conditions created when a chakra is worked on is perhaps the most important. When a chakra blossoms, the energy bracketed inside is released gradually. We feel this energy in the form of emotional conditions created in the heart. When we nurture these inner conditions and make them a part of our nature, they express themselves as qualities in our behavior. In this way, we gradually reprogram our nature by developing the qualities that help us grow and evolve.

Conditions are the steps we ascend on the path to infinity. Transmission and the guru’s work create conditions that we experience. For example, at the first chakra we develop acceptance, and at the second chakra we develop peacefulness, and so on. When we feel these conditions within, we work with them to imbibe them. When we make use of the condition by immersing ourselves in it, we grow. If not, the conditions are lost.





AN INTERCONNECTED SYSTEM OF CHAKRAS


Babuji coined a term, invertendo, to capture the inversions of truth that we see in nature. Invertendo shines the spotlight on the paradoxes that we observe in nature’s design. For example, the lower one goes (humility), the higher their consciousness rises. The more emptiness one creates within, the greater the grace that descends in their heart. The more centered one becomes, the more one’s consciousness travels.

Babuji observed that in the spiritual anatomy, the interconnections between chakras are an example of invertendo. To understand it, consider dividing each chakra into upper and lower parts. As a chakra begins to flower, both its upper and lower parts are awakened. The vibrations from one chakra’s upper part resonate with the next chakra’s lower part in the sequence, creating a relay race–type flow for the energy.

Because of the interconnection, similar vibratory patterns are observed across sets of chakras. The odd-numbered chakras share certain patterns, and even-numbered chakras share a different pattern. Understanding interconnection is a significant discovery because it helped design a meditation practice where one can work in parallel across the anatomy instead of serially taking up one chakra after another.

Think of it this way: You are building a house. An efficient way to build the house is to line up the masons, electricians, plumbers, and carpenters on a schedule and ensure that once the foundation is laid, the masons start the structure. While the masons work on the structure, electricians can run the conduits for the cables. The parallel work is efficient and synchronized.

Contrast this to hiring a civil worker and digging the foundation. After this work is over, you go hire the masons. Once the masons are done, you start figuring out electrical systems. Such sequential work is inefficient, and often there is rework.

The Heartfulness system takes advantage of invertendo to work across the anatomy. That’s why, at times, practitioners feel vibrations at several chakras in the same meditation. The specific work may be happening at one chakra, and its echo effects are felt at the other chakras. Preceptors sometimes conduct exercises to help practitioners become more sensitive to the interconnected nature of chakras. In these sessions, they work on a single chakra for the entire group and then ask the group to share their experiences. It’s common to see the participants report stronger vibrations at one chakra and milder vibrations at other chakras, indicating that the work on one chakra has had ripple effects on others.





Colors at Chakras


In meditation, practitioners often observe various colors, especially in the early years of practice. For instance, when work happens at the first chakra, a yellow light may appear during meditation. Similarly, depending on the chakra, you might see white, pink, orange, red, green, or bluish colors. These colors can appear as a gentle glow, a gradient, or as a flash in your meditation. When moving from one chakra to another, there is often an intermingling of colors. Not everyone notices colors. Some individuals may observe colors, while others may be more attuned to vibrations, movement, or feelings that arise during meditation. Ultimately, what’s most important is to stay attentive to the sensations or experiences that arise during the meditation without judgment or expectation.





Movement and Vibration


Chakras spin along the vertical axis like the hands of a clock. Some chakras spin in a clockwise direction, while others move in a counterclockwise direction. Then there is one chakra that is, shall we say, moody. All chakras have a direction, but it is in the first five chakras—which form the Heart Region—that the movement is most palpable.





The chakras form an energy field, and the energy field of each person is unique. Even identical twins would not have energy fields that are alike. An echo of the energy field can be felt physically. You may feel it as a gentle buzzing, rotating movement at the chakra’s location. Sometimes you also feel other sensations, like the chakra throbbing, pulsing, pinching, and even giving you a tickle. These are all types of vibrations one feels when a chakra is worked upon.

There are times when even during routine activities like reading, working in the kitchen, or watching TV, you may feel some vibration in the chest area, the soles of your feet, the palms, or at the back of your head. Observe these signs. They point to some work that started during a prior meditation and is continuing, or some new work that has started in your system.

When you notice something like this, close your eyes gently and center yourself by connecting to the heart with love. Direct your attention to the area where the work is happening. You need to be gentle, almost like shifting a baby who fell asleep in your lap back onto the bed. Tuning in when you get an inkling of work will help you appreciate the spiritual work happening in the system.





At times, in the crown area of the head, you may feel circular vibrations or a gentle pressure pushing downward. At other times, you may feel sensations similar to a feather moving through your hair. Occasionally you may also feel pressure at the temples and the occipital regions. These could be signs of spiritual work. Instead of instinctively scratching your head, take a moment to center yourself and try to feel what might be occurring.

The movement of the chakras, especially the heart chakras, may also show up on the skin as mild skin pigmentation. During the early years of my meditation, I noticed pinkish spots at the heart chakras that were being worked on. These spots would last for a few hours before fading away. I was a student in college back then. When I shared my observations with one of my preceptors, he encouraged my attentiveness and suggested keeping a journal to track my observations and experiences. I encourage you to do the same.





A WORD OF CAUTION: IMAGINATION VS. EXPERIENCE


There is a downside to this information, of course. It can trigger your imagination, and you mentally create these phenomena. An effective way to keep a check on mental fancies is by writing our observations in a journal and forgetting about them. Over time, when we read our journals, we will notice patterns that help us separate imagination from experience. Also, when we have a real experience, there will be no doubt about it. You will be certain of what you witnessed.

Additionally, avoid comparing your experiences with those of others. Though we share the same goal, each person’s journey is unique. The attitudes we exhibit, the eagerness for the goal, the conditioning we carry, the environment we live in, the company we keep, and many other factors are unique to us. With such diversity inherent to our lives, comparison can only confuse us. It breeds doubt and competition that can distract us from the main goal. So, remain focused on cultivating the right attitudes and continue with the practice.





Locating Points and Chakras


We are a living atlas, carrying the map to the Center with us. The topographic map of circles of consciousness can be charted on the body with the latitudes and longitudes of the chakras. In this section, you will learn the locations of all sixteen chakras and the four points that play a vital role in the spiritual anatomy project. Try to memorize the locations of the points and chakras, and stay attentive to any effects you may feel at these locations. Nurturing one’s curiosity with interest and observation will make the yatra an engaging journey.





Points A, B, C, and D


To locate the chakras, we first locate four points called A, B, C, and D on the body. As I mentioned before, points are specialist chakras, and each has a specific foundational role in guiding the energy flow through the chakras.

Start at the base of the sternum, where the rib cage cavity begins. Measure one finger width (using your own finger) down from the sternum. Then move four finger-widths to the left. This is the location of point B.

Two fingers above point B is point A.

Point C is on the bottom rib, directly below point B.

Point D is two fingers to the left of point C, directly underneath the left nipple.

Take your time to locate all four points on your body. When I did this exercise, I took small round stickers and stuck them on my chest at these points. Then I looked at myself in the mirror to get a clear idea of where these points were located. It’s crowded real estate, with so many points packed into a small area, and it’s helpful to be certain of the physical location.

Over time, you will become adept at identifying vibrations at these points. It takes patience, and it’s essential to allow your heart to guide you. Take an interest in it, but don’t push yourself too hard. It will happen naturally. Initially, learning a new skill takes effort, but eventually, it becomes automatic, similar to how children learn to ride a bicycle. They start with a tricycle, progress to a bicycle with training wheels, and ultimately they can ride effortlessly while chatting with friends, singing songs, and even without holding the handlebars.





Now that we have located points A, B, C, and D, let’s locate the chakras.





The Sixteen Chakras


Let’s begin by locating the first chakra (heart chakra), which, as we can see in the figure, lies exactly between the left nipple and point D. You can also find the first chakra by measuring approximately three finger-widths (3f) up from point D.

Now, looking at the following image, you can see that the second chakra is on the right side of the body, the mirror image of the first chakra.

Next, imagine flipping the first and second chakras upward so they’re a mirror image above the nipples. These are the third and fourth chakras.

The fifth chakra is precisely where the two collarbones meet at the base of the neck. The fifth chakra is also called the throat chakra. Chakras 1 to 5 are the heart chakras, or chakras of the Heart Region.





Now we move to the chakras of the Mind Region.

The top portion of your ear is called the helix. Place your right index finger on the right helix and your left index finger on the left helix. Draw lines upward from the helixes until they meet at the mid-scalp. This is the location of the crown chakra, also called the thousand-petaled lotus, Sahasra Dal Kamal, Sahasrara, or SDK, as I will refer to it in this book.i From SDK, two finger-widths toward the forehead is the tenth chakra.

From the tenth chakra, measure four finger-widths toward the forehead, and that is the ninth chakra. From the ninth chakra, measure two finger-widths forward, and that is the eighth chakra.

Three finger-widths down from the eighth chakra, slightly above the eyebrows, lies the sixth chakra. Exactly above the sixth chakra, overlapping slightly, is the seventh chakra.

The sixth chakra is a little forward, and the seventh is on the back. The seventh chakra is also larger than the sixth. The two chakras appear to form a figure 8, with the upper circle larger than the lower one.

Time for a quick recap. So far, we have located the five chakras of the heart. From there, we looped over to the SDK, which oriented us to chakras 10, 9, 8, 7, and 6.

Now let’s go back to the SDK and measure two finger-widths toward the back of the head. This is the eleventh chakra. The gap between the tenth and the eleventh chakras, in the middle of which lies the SDK, is four finger-widths.

From the eleventh chakra, measure four finger-widths down to locate the twelfth chakra. An interesting aspect about the twelfth chakra is that attached to it is the opening or the aperture called the Brahmarandhra (brahman—“higher self”; randhra—“aperture”). The soul enters the body from this aperture at the twelfth chakra. In the womb, when the fetus’s Brahmarandhra is developed, the soul enters the fetus through the Brahmarandhra and settles down in the body.

Four finger-widths down from the twelfth chakra is the thirteenth chakra, the Central Region, the seat of the Center within the human frame.





The Root, Sacral, and Navel Chakras


If you have been counting along with me, you will notice that we have located four points and thirteen chakras. “But Daaji!” you will say. “You have said that there are sixteen chakras. Where are the other three?”

Besides the thirteen chakras we have located so far, there are three additional chakras along the spine. These three are the root, sacral, and navel chakras. These three lower chakras are common across the animal kingdom, and their primary role is in sustaining physical existence.

Root chakra: The root chakra plays the role of making one feel grounded. It provides the primary support for existence and perpetuates the most fundamental need of survival. In Sanskrit, it’s called Mooladhar (mool—“primary” or “main”; adhar—“support”).

Sacral chakra: This is the dwelling place of the lower self and is responsible for procreation and sensuality. In Sanskrit, it’s called Swadhisthana (Swa—“self”; adhisthana—“dwelling place”).

Navel chakra: Located at the navel, this chakra generates the ego aspect of domination and ruling. The sense of pride and power comes from here. In Sanskrit, it’s called Manipura, whose name means “the dwelling place of jewels” (mani—“jewels”; pura—“city”).

The main purpose of these three chakras is to ensure our survival. They are responsible for actions that deal with food, sex, power, dominance, and so on. These needs are primal and instinctive, and that’s why these chakras are filled with power.

In Heartfulness practices, the focus is on purifying the system and awakening the heart chakra first, which then leads to the activation of higher chakras. As the system becomes purified, energy from the higher chakras flows down and nourishes these lower chakras. This cascade effect is similar to how walking for heart health can lead to overall health improvements and stronger calf muscles. Meditating on the heart benefits both higher and lower chakras.

The cascade approach also saves time by addressing multiple chakras simultaneously. Without it, one would need to observe strict discipline and austere practices to manage the effects of power released in the lower chakras. These practices can be time-consuming and difficult to follow.

The heart chakra and others above it are dormant in animals. Because of this, animals cannot evolve their consciousness willfully. Awakening the heart chakra and evolving consciousness is possible for humans but it requires our willing and joyful participation. Human beings can think and evolve, which is why many cultures celebrate human life as a blessing of the Almighty.

The three chakras—root, sacral, and navel—along with the thirteen located in the chest and the head, add up to sixteen (13 + 3) and a bonus of four specialty chakras, the points. You now have the traits of chakras, the locations, and the interconnection mapped out. Knowing what you know so far will add a different flavor to your practice. The Meditate and Transcend aspect of the book comes alive even more now.

One important thing to remember: Do not worry about doing something “wrong” while you practice. We develop mastery only through practice. Also, understand that there may be days when you miss practice, but don’t give up because of that. Whenever you realize you are off track, press the reset button and resume with fervor.





ASK DAAJI


Daaji, I struggle with reading what is going on inside my mind and body. How can I improve in this area?

To make sense of the world outside, you have the toolbox of the five senses. You can smell the roses, see the sunset, feel the touch of your beloved, and taste the finest life has to offer. Since birth, our attention has been directed outward toward the external world. Our attention is easily distracted, like a kitten chasing a red laser dot; it’s all over the place.

When you embark on the spiritual anatomy project, you mark a turnaround. Through meditation, you focus your attention inward, like shining a spotlight on the stage of the soul. It takes some time to explore the landscape and get used to the inner view. You need to cultivate sensitivity for inner exploration.

To develop sensitivity, your attitude in meditation should be like that of a cat waiting for a mouse. So much alertness is needed. But most people get so absorbed that they go deep into meditation and can’t observe much. It takes time to develop the sensitivity to understand the work happening within. Start with small steps. For example, identify where you felt heaviness or lightness in the chest. Left side or right? Upper half or lower? How was the flow of Transmission? How was your condition before meditation, and how was it after? What thoughts did you have? Start writing all these details in your journal, and your sensitivity will grow.

But sensitivity can be a double-edged sword. Let’s say you are very sensitive. Then you are an open door for all the good, bad, and ugly around you. Could you tolerate everything that came your way? So, a lower sensitivity threshold is Mother Nature’s way of protecting you. As you become more accepting, generous, and forgiving, you become more sensitive. If you are already sensitive, use your gift by working on yourself. Develop higher levels of acceptance and generosity. That will make the sensitivity tolerable, and you can use it when necessary as a tool.





Footnote


i Since we don’t work on the SDK on the way to the Center, we don’t include it in the count for the sixteen chakras. There is a reason why we don’t work on the SDK, which we will touch upon in chapter 24, when we talk about the tenth chakra.





8.


The Four Stages of Flowering of a Chakra


If I ask someone, “How was your meditation?” the most common answers I usually get are, “Oh! It was deep,” “I had many thoughts,” “I think I fell asleep,” “I felt lighter,” “I felt relaxed,” or something along those lines. Describing a meditative experience is difficult because, in some ways, we are trying to distill the ocean into a teacup. The sensitivity to observe and the vocabulary to describe are both required, and they take some time to develop. Often, it’s easiest to describe how we feel at the end of meditation.

A condition is what you feel at the end of meditation. Peaceful, joyful, blissful, light, agitated, restless, content, irritable, happy, emboldened, settled, and compassionate—these conditions are the gifts of your practice. Each time you sit to meditate, the bracketed energy inside a chakra is released gradually. This higher-potency energy gently flows into the center of our consciousness, our heart. We feel this energy in the form of conditions in the heart.

You need to be vigilant in nurturing the condition. When you protect and nurture the condition, it grows into a meditative state that carries you. But if you lose the condition by, say, checking your phone immediately after meditation or getting into some useless chitchat, then you revert to the previous state. It’s like drawing water from a well with a bucket full of holes. By the time you pull up the bucket, it’s almost empty. It happens to most of us. We enjoy an excellent condition, and within a few hours what was created is lost. But when you nurture a condition, then you build on that condition and allow a newer condition to descend.

A condition is something that you work in and work with, meaning you can work in the peaceful condition created after meditation and stay connected with it throughout the day. You can also work with the peaceful condition and make it grow into harmony and joy.

At first, a condition will only descend after deep meditation. With practice though, your consciousness can evolve to a level where, on demand, you can recall conditions of peace, joy, or any other condition in yourself, much like ordering a dish from a menu.

The journey through the chakras to the Source relies on the conditions created in the journey, which serve as the steps to infinity. In the first chapter, I wrote that the heart’s inspirations lead to feelings, which in turn lead to thoughts and actions. But what triggers inspiration in the first place? Conditions. The condition within triggers inspirations that grow into feelings, thoughts, and actions. Feelings, thoughts, and actions power the transformation engine that helps you design your destiny. At the heart of it, your meditative practice creates conditions that untether your consciousness and help you grow.

Conditions Inspirations Change your feelings Change your thinking Change your actions Self-Transformation

You may ask, “Daaji, what creates conditions?” The blocks in consciousness affect the creation of conditions. But a bigger factor in creating conditions is the secret ingredient: your attitude. The attitude you bring to meditation determines the altitude from which the conditions descend into your heart. Contrast an angry, irritated, and disinterested attitude with a loving, tender, and melting attitude. Which heart will attract conditions that propel inner growth?

When you nurture conditions with the right attitudes and take a keen interest in observing them, you can appreciate how the flowering of chakras helps your consciousness evolve. You can notice the finer subtleties of inner change. For example, you can experience how the blossoming of the second chakra and later on the eighth chakra creates unique flavors of peace. Over time terms like heavy peace, very light peace, shallow peace, and drowning peace become part of your vocabulary. All these conditions and many more are created as chakras flower.

The flowering of a chakra happens in four distinct stages, and in these stages, it goes from being a knot to a lotus. Each stage serves a specific purpose, and once that purpose is fulfilled, the next stage commences, much like the launch stages of a rocket that propel it to reach escape velocity and settle into orbit. There are four stages in which chakra flowers. These are:

• Coexistence (Salokyata)

• Nearness (Sameepyata)

• Identicality (Saroopyata)

• Merger (Sayujyata)





Stage One: Coexistence (Salokyatai)


In coexistence, your consciousness is raised to the level of the chakra you arrived at. The sudden shift in consciousness can be a peculiar experience for some. It’s like moving to a new country. The language, culture, and cuisine are all different. You need to adjust and adapt to the new place that has different weather and winds. In coexistence, your consciousness, which was well settled, is now on new turf. It is a condition in which you feel awakened, alert. The mind perceives the presence of a pervasive divine force, ennobling you to elevate your consciousness. Coexistence can make some people feel a little restless or feel mild heaviness in the head. The internal dissonance or discomfort in coexistence is a sign of progress. But some people stop meditation because of their subconscious resistance to change. Without thinking much of it, one day, you stop meditation because you don’t feel like it. One day becomes two days. Then you meditate on your own again for a day or two, but the interest is less. After a few fits and starts, you lose the rhythm and meditation drops off.





Please remember, whenever you don’t feel like meditating or you feel uneasy, it’s a sign that your consciousness is trying to adjust to a new inner environment. It’s like lifting more weights in the gym than you are used to. You feel discomfort in the beginning, but after a few days of repeating the new cycle of weights, you overcome the resistance and enjoy the new threshold.ii





Stage Two: Nearness (Sameepyata)





In coexistence, you entered the fringes of a new world. Any uneasiness felt during coexistence calms down with the help of your practice and the sittings. In a matter of days, the peculiarity and newness you experienced lessen.

In Sanskrit, sameep means “nearness” or “closeness.” It is the stage where you begin to adjust to the new level of consciousness and enjoy the new condition. Your heart feels like savoring the condition more, and you feel like staying absorbed for longer after meditation. You find yourself slipping back into meditation. During the day also, you feel like closing your eyes and savoring the condition.

A helpful tip at this stage is to practice mini meditations. Take a few minutes during the day and meditate. Before lunch or when you get up to get a cup of coffee, take five minutes and meditate. These mini meditations enhance the condition.

The feeling of a pervasive divine force transforms into a feeling that everything around you is absorbed in divinity. Some experience it as awe. They can’t quite explain why looking at a flower or a bird, or just sitting in silence fills their heart with joy. Nearness continues to enliven with the help of mini meditations, and you feel the condition at that chakra in a wholesome way.





Stage Three: Identicality (Saroopyata)





Once you are familiar with the various conditions at a chakra, you develop identicality. The word saroop means “identical in form.” In identicality, your consciousness is akin to the new level. How do you come to know that identicality has begun? The feeling of lightness is one key sign. Lightness in the heart makes the weight of all mental activity lighter. Your thoughts seem lighter; your interactions have a lightness where you don’t get sucked into unnecessary discussions.

The analogy of immigrating to a new country is fitting for the stages of the flowering of a chakra. The first time you arrive at immigration is the stage of coexistence. Over time, as you become familiar with your surroundings and settle down in the new country, you’re in the stage of nearness. Once you are well settled, all feelings of being an outsider are gone. You identify yourself as one with the new country. This is the stage of identicality. Your consciousness is in resonance with the new vibratory level. You are aware that something significant has changed within.

You feel grateful and settled but nature wants you to keep growing. So the urge to move further starts taking shape in your heart. As a result, a feeling of negation begins in the heart. Negation is a silent realization that lays the groundwork for the merger, which is the fourth stage of the opening of the chakra.





Stage Four: Merger and Beyond (Sayujyata)





Yuj is the Sanskrit word for “union.” It’s the same root word for yoga, too. Sayujyata is the final stage of the blossoming of a chakra. Your consciousness is now in complete resonance with the higher vibratory level. There are no ripples, only total uniformity. The previous stages of coexistence, nearness, and identicality are a thing of the past. Now the stage is all set for the finale: merger.iii

A drop falls into the ocean. Is the drop in the ocean or the ocean in the drop? Merger with a chakra leads you to a trancelike state in meditation. There is a feeling of oneness in which the prevailing consciousness has dissolved into the new level of consciousness. This is now the new normal for you. Securing the condition at a chakra is possible only through merger of consciousness. If you are separate, then there is a possibility of losing the condition, but when you have merged, nothing can take it away. So merging gives security.

Merger begets tenderness in the heart. When you feel these signs, make the inner condition dynamic by expressing it in your behavior. When you speak, act, think, or look, infuse your inner condition into these actions. This will create balance between inside and outside and stabilize merger.

Merger creates love, and love dissolves the ego. When the ego dissolves, consciousness expands. With merger, your consciousness becomes one with the new level. When the merger is complete, in some of the subsequent meditations, condition is as if everything is gone. There is no impression upon the heart, not even that of existence. The meditation is not deep or absorbing, but it’s not superficial, either. You feel only a sense of profoundness. Sometimes such a condition can confuse meditators. They worry that something has blocked their consciousness because they don’t feel anything. But in a few days, this condition makes way for the next cycle of flowering of the chakra.





The Flowering of a Chakra Is Like the River Flowing into the Ocean


The flowering of a chakra is not a onetime occurrence. Just as a river continuously flows into the ocean without ever declaring its merger complete, securing a merger with a chakra doesn’t mark the culmination of one’s journey at that level. The merger with a chakra allows the qualities of the chakra to express in one’s consciousness. There is no limit to how generous, loving, or compassionate one can become. Once we cross a consciousness threshold, we move to the next chakra while the work to attain mastery at the previous chakra continues.

Think of it this way. You open one store, and it starts doing good business. Now you have accrued enough capital to start the second one. From the operations of the two stores, you get capital to start the third store, and so on. But this doesn’t mean you can forget about the first store or the second one. You still need to operate the stores that opened earlier and make sure that they continue to grow. If the stores don’t perform, then you can’t open newer stores.

Similarly, you move from one chakra to another as soon as you gather enough momentum. For example, the spiritual energy and conditions you experience at the first and second chakras propel you to the third; and while you are at the third chakra, work continues to secure merger with those lower chakras. In this way, your vertical journey toward higher consciousness continues even as you deepen the conditions of each lower chakra. This process of rising and merging enables us to grasp and master the different conditions encountered at each stage of the journey.

The key question to ask at this stage is: What clogs the field around a chakra that prevents it from blossoming? Earlier in the chapter, I wrote that the blocks in consciousness that inhibit the descent of conditions in the heart. Coming up next, we understand more about the blocks and how to clear them so the chakras can blossom.





SUGGESTED PRACTICE: AEIOU OF THE INNER CONDITION


The beautiful conditions created in meditation are like seeds that can grow and expand into deeper meditative states. The practice of AEIOU helps you retain the condition and nurture it so it grows into a newer meditative state.

A means Acquire the condition. E means Enliven the condition. I means Imbibe. O means become One with it. U means Unite with it.





Acquire. We acquire a condition through meditation. Enliven, Imbibe, One, and Unite take place after the meditation is over and you are ready to get up. These four steps allow the condition to settle and expand. They take a total of four to five minutes.

Enliven. What you acquire in meditation is the seed of a condition. It is a possibility that you can actualize through conscious attention and willingness. For example, if, after meditating, you feel peace, keep your eyes closed and allow every cell of your body to enjoy that peace. Then, from that physical feeling of peace at the cellular level, let it be drawn inward to your subtle levels. As you inhale, feel that peace flowing down and into every part of you; on the exhale, imagine sharing that peace with the Universe.

Imbibe. Once the condition is enlivened, savor it like you would savor a nice meal or appreciate a beautiful painting. By savoring what was created in meditation, you allow the condition to assimilate within you.

One and Unite. After a few minutes of quiet imbibing, automatically you become one and unite with the inner state. End with the gentle affirmation: “My thoughts, words, and actions are imbued with the inner spiritual state within.”

Tips

After meditation, stay seated in the same pose for AEIOU. Allow the physical awareness to take over gradually; don’t rush into it.

It is also advisable to avoid drinking water immediately after meditation. Just wait for a few minutes. Water has the unique property of changing the inner condition. For example, if someone is upset, we offer them a glass of water, which helps them feel better. But drinking water as soon as you open your eyes after meditation will dilute the meditative state within.

Avoid any loud conversations or phone calls as soon as meditation ends. The condition we acquire after meditation is subtle, and your attention with tenderness will help it settle within.





Footnotes


i In Sanskrit, Sa-lok-yata means “coexisting in the same world”; lok means “the world.” Every chakra is a world in itself.

ii If you find you are struggling, I invite you to visit with a preceptor through the Heartfulness app or to schedule a one-on-one meditation.

iii In Sanskrit, merger is called Layavastha (laya means “dissolution,” an aspect of merger; and avastha means “state”). As you move from one chakra to another, you keep merging with various states of consciousness, and the final merger is with the Center.





PART 5





EMOTIONAL CONDITIONING—SAMSKARAS





9.


The Elephant and the Chair: Conditioning that Binds Us


In a popular study published in the Journal of Psychopathology and Clinical Science, the football fans of Dartmouth and Princeton were given a questionnaire after they watched the same game. The researchers wanted to understand what the fans thought happened in the game. The results were astounding. The “game” was many different games. The fans had different versions of the events that transpired for the same game. And each version was just as real to a particular person as other versions were to other people.12 Each fan had their own version of reality. This study was done way back in 1954. Since then, a large body of research shows that people see the world through their own filters. Their attitudes, beliefs, and biases define their perceptions of themselves and the world.

All of us suffer from this kind of conditioning. It constrains our spiritual growth, and we have many blind spots. Only when we evolve our consiousness can we become aware of the filters blocking our awareness—the habitual thoughts and feelings that arise—and start to remove them.





We Are Victims of Hijacked Awareness


When your consciousness is free-flowing, you feel transcendent, connected. Think about how you feel when you are joyful, cheerful, or grateful; the heart opens up, allowing the consciousness to flow unhindered. But the moment your heart encounters something you don’t like, its reflex action is to contract the consciousness like the touch-me-not plant. The moment you touch it, the leaves contract. Your consciousness is also like this, expanding and contracting, always in flux.

The flux in the field of consciousness is caused by your likes and dislikes, which hijack your awareness. If you tune into the chatter of thoughts in your mind, you will notice that most of the chatter is connected to your likes and dislikes. Something you like catches your attention, creating a loop of thoughts. Then something else you dislike grabs your attention and creates its own cycle.

Though the idea of likes and dislikes may seem innocuous, the actions and reactions they trigger cause blocks in our consciousness. The blocks choke the flow of consciousness by clogging the chakras and trapping the vibrant spiritual being in shackles. Each time you try to create a wave of change, the blocks quell the nascent wave. Each time the inspiration gushes upward, it gets blocked from becoming a diamond. But how did these blocks form?





YOUR LIKES AND DISLIKES


The next time you are in a busy place, take a moment to notice your thoughts. You can do this in a restaurant, on a crowded street, or on the airplane. Watch your thoughts as you observe people boarding the flight. Do you hear the chatter of judgments for their looks, what they wear, what they carry on, how they talk, how they stow away their luggage, and so on? It’s a stream of consciousness seasoned with likes and dislikes. Most of us unconsciously judge ourselves and others. Our journey is to move from judgment to acceptance to compassion to love.





Likes, Dislikes, and Knots


Your likes and dislikes trigger your emotions, and your emotions create the blocks that affect the chakras. Let me unpack that with an example. Let’s say in your childhood a dog bit you and tore into your calf. The trauma of the dog bite aside, you also had to deal with painful shots to prevent infection. The whole episode left you with bad memories, and ever since, even as an adult, you keep your distance from dogs and feel nervous around them.

Now, imagine you have a little daughter, and you’re out together taking a walk in the park. She sees a dog in the park and starts playing with it. While you stiffen in fear, she leans down to knead the dog’s ears and pulls its tail. The dog is enjoying the obscene pampering it gets from your little one. While you grow increasingly nervous, your daughter is busy making some of her happiest memories.

Why did your reactions differ? Simple: Because your child’s memories are different from yours. The child, you could say, has a beginner’s mind. With no prior experience, she sees this dog as it is in the moment: loving, playful, and happy. On the other hand, your mind calls up the past traumatic experience. What’s inside you creates your view of what’s outside. The memories inside create the emotions through which you process the world. Your past conditions you and, without mitigation, runs your present.

Usually, you go through life processing the experiences that come your way. Reading a book, driving a car, walking to the store, cooking dinner, and taking a shower are examples of experiences we take in and process before moving on to the next one. While doing so, if you are joyful, grateful, or cheerful, the heart opens and consciousness flows unhindered. You feel a deep sense of connectedness with your surroundings. If not, these experiences are ambivalent, they pass by, and that’s also fine.

But when something triggers your likes or dislikes, it prevents you from taking in, processing, and moving on. You get stuck in that moment. You resist the experiences you don’t like, and you become attached to the experiences you do like. Whether it’s attachment or resistance, like or dislike, the flow of consciousness is blocked. Subsequent experiences have to overcome these blocks to capture our attention.

Take a moment to scan back through your life and think of the incidents when you resisted, or you became attached. “I was betrayed,” “I detest that person,” “I want that business at all costs”—the more the I-ness (ego), the stronger the emotions. Such strong emotions hog your attention. You may be driving, eating dinner, showering, or speaking with a friend, but your mind is brooding over the blocked incident. Be it attachment (“Oh! I loved her so much!”) or be it resistance (“How could they do that to me?”), the result is the same. You are stuck with a block that hijacks your attention.

In his best-selling book, The Untethered Soul, Michael Singer writes about the blue Ford Mustang. You see a blue Mustang that looks like your girlfriend’s car, and you think you see two people hugging. Those few seconds are enough to keep you blocked and you miss all other cars, trees, and drivers. Years later, the same emotions bubble up when you see a blue Mustang with a couple. The unresolved emotional blocks create deep impressions with exceptionally vivid detail and long-lasting memory of the emotional turbulence. The yogis call these impressions samskaras.





Samskaras: The Blocks in Your Consciousness


When water flows over the same ground, it carves out a channel for itself. Over time, this channel widens and makes way for a gushing river. Now when it rains, that is the only path the water takes. Your samskaras also carve a pattern of behavior in you. How you think, how you react, and what you like or dislike are all the results of samskaras. The life you are leading is your samskaras unfolding in front of you.

Modern psychology has deep insights in this regard. Research into areas like neuroplasticity, trauma, light bulb memories, and habit formation shows how we store emotional memories within, and they condition our behavior. The much-repeated line “Neurons that fire together wire together” conveys the same idea of rainwater deepening the same channel year after year for the water to flow.

Most people never realize how much their samskaras condition them. They are the invisible filters through which they look at the world. A good example is how something as strong and mighty as an elephant is broken down and conditioned.





First, when the elephant is a baby, he is tied to a tree with a rope. The elephant isn’t yet strong enough to snap the rope. As the elephant grows, he feels helpless each time he is tied and stands in one place. Eventually, he becomes so conditioned that he no longer believes he can break free. This elephant can then be tied to a light plastic chair and stay put, even though he could tear down entire forests if he wished.





Samskaras Form Habits of Emotional Response


The unresolved emotional blocks fester inside us and create samskaras that instigate behavior patterns. Each time a situation arises, the same behavior pattern is enforced, and as a result, we form emotional habits.

And what’s so special about a habit? Once a habit is formed, it occurs automatically, without much thought or effort. All it needs is a cue, some type of trigger, and then the programmed behavior follows. For instance, when you turn on the coffee maker in the morning, the rest of the steps follow automatically. Turning on the coffee maker serves as the cue for the habit to unfold. Feeling bored could serve as a cue to mindlessly scroll through social media or check email. Other examples of habit cues: Seeing your workout clothes may prompt you to exercise, or smelling food cooking could serve as a cue to start eating.

Our minds like to form habits. Habits relieve the mind from the pressure to be actively present all the time. Otherwise, imagine if every day we had to learn how to cook, how to drive, and so on. Habits allow life to happen in cruise control. Our minds have a vast storehouse of memories allocated for habits, making our lives easier.

The samskaras become the habits of emotional response. They create a program that triggers automatic steps when a situation arises. And each time the situation repeats, you take the same steps, and the samskaras are reinforced. Smell the pizza—order take-out; see a dog—step aside; see a blue Mustang on the road—curse the ex. It’s all automatic.

And when samskaras are triggered, they can cause emotional chain reactions. In a chain reaction, one neutron is enough to trigger an uncontrolled explosion. Samskaras can be like that. They can create disproportionate emotional responses and make you feel weak and helpless. The stronger your emotional reaction, the heavier the samskara. Traumatic incidents like loss of a loved one, violent encounters, heartbreak, or abuse, all form deep samskaras that weigh on one’s soul. Regardless of their origin, samskaras are the plaque that clogs consciousness.

Remember the three states of a chakra: knot, chakra, and lotus? How do you think the chakra, a wheel of energy, became a knot in the first place? It’s because of the samskaras. They clogged the field around the chakra and suffocated it. The result is blocks in consciousness.

It’s important to remember that attachment and resistance both create samskaras. Whether the cage is made of iron or gold, it will imprison you. By tending to our spiritual anatomy—bringing awareness to the emotions, memories, and experiences that block our merger with the highest qualities—we can clean away these samskaras and return our knotted energy centers to chakras. In this way, we give ourselves the opportunity to experience them blooming.

Remember that emotional blocks come up in our behavior because they need resolution. Anger arises in everyday life because those emotional blocks seek resolution through love. Irritability comes up to be resolved through kindness. Grief burdens the heart, seeking the light of compassion. Fear bubbles up to be purged through courage.

Unaware that these emotions seek resolution, our instinctive reaction feeds rage to anger, amplifies irritability into hate, drowns grief into depression, and feeds anxiety to fear. Such instinctive reactions change when you do the cleaning.

The practice of cleaning creates space inside your heart; daily meditation fills this space with conditions that create wisdom. Bit by bit, you develop correct thinking and the right understanding of situations. It is through correct thinking and right understanding that you begin to reprogram yourself and unblock your consciousness.

Forming samskaras doesn’t mean you are a terrible person or a lesser human. Samskaras are what they are, a part of the emotional cause-effect equation. The important thing is that you do not become bound by these blocks. You are bigger and stronger than the samskaras that bind you. Inside you, a beautiful spiritual being lies shackled. Your spiritual anatomy project will unleash this being. The rope that tied the elephant only needs to be cut.





10.


Points A, B, C, and D: The Feeder Factories of Samskaras


John Snow was a physician and epidemiologist in mid-nineteenth-century London, where cholera outbreaks were a common occurrence and thousands of people died from the disease every year. At the time, the policy was to drain swamps and spray disinfectants in the air because it was thought that cholera was airborne. But Snow was skeptical of this theory, and he began pointing out the locations of cholera cases in London on a map. Through his investigation, he identified a cluster of cases around a water pump in a neighborhood. Snow convinced the local authorities to remove the handle of the pump, effectively cutting off the source of contaminated water. The outbreak subsided, and John Snow’s theory that cholera was waterborne was later proven by other scientists also.

Snow’s work is a powerful reminder of the importance of identifying and addressing the root cause of any problem. As you learned in the last chapter, the samskaras block the chakras. We clear the samskaras and that enables us to progress. But what creates samskaras in the first place? The points A, B, C, and D are the root cause for triggering the formation of samskaras. When these points are disturbed, they affect the other chakras, triggering samskara formation that destabilizes us. The points play a foundational role in triggering the formation of samskaras. The knowledge shared here will help you in understanding the finer details of how they form, and their impact on our journey.





Point C Is the Epicenter


Try this the next time you are in a public place, such as a restaurant, a crowded street, or an airplane. Watch your thoughts as you observe the people around you. You’ll notice a stream of likes and dislikes flowing through your mind about their appearance, their clothing, their carry-ons, how they talk, and even how they store their luggage. This stream of consciousness is often seasoned with judgments based on personal preferences. Pay attention, and you may even feel a mild pressure in your chest when you have particularly strong reactions. The pressure will be felt at the location of point C (for a refresher on the locations of points, refer back to here).

Point C is a strategic point in the spiritual anatomy. Whenever we react to something with feelings of like or dislike, those vibrations start from point C. If your reactions are mild, the vibrations are not strong enough to form samskaras. But if the reactions are strong, then samskaras affect the points and the chakras, too.

This does not mean we shun all personal preferences. It’s in our nature to have personal preferences. What we read, eat, wear, and think are driven by our personal preferences. I prefer Gujarati food, while you may prefer Italian cuisine. But if we can avoid insisting on things, or becoming obstinate and demanding, then we protect point C from getting disturbed and prevent the formation of most samskaras.

The practice of constant remembrancei is how we temper our likes and dislikes and, by extension, our samskaras. Constant remembrance is the practice of staying connected to the positive inner conditions you create through meditation and allowing them to grow.

While talking, eating, reading, driving, and anything else you do, stay connected to your heart. That connection creates a channel for your attention to flow inward. As they say, “Energy goes where attention flows,” and through constant remembrance you can divert the flow of your attention—avoiding the deep grooves of samskaras and, in time, finding new paths for your consciousness. Constant remembrance helps one transcend the paradox of likes and dislikes, thereby creating the space for inner growth.





The Paradox of Likes and Dislikes


Before we go further, let’s begin with a clarification for those wondering: “Daaji, are you suggesting that we give up all desires? Are desires inherently bad?” No. We all have desires and aspirations; in fact, the spiritual anatomy project itself is a desire for self-improvement. Desire is an expression of the soul’s yearning for transcendence. But because of samskaras, the energy of desire is often misdirected toward lower aims in life. It’s as if a piece of iron is placed next to a compass and skews the true north. In the case of the soul’s true north, the compass is cluttered with iron filings of samskaras, causing each chakra to become a pole of its own, leading us toward different directions instead of the main objective.

It’s easy to say, “Overcome desire,” but the reality is that it’s not that simple. Repressing desire is not a permanent solution, as it may work sometimes but not always. In many cases, repression creates much heavier blocks than the desire itself. Another option is to satisfy the desire, but each satisfied desire often propagates many more in return, reinforcing the attachment. Giving up desires can create strain, while giving in to desires strengthens the attachment. So what’s the solution?

Desire is the energy created by lack. While you cannot create or destroy energy, you can transform it. The energy of desire can be transformed by attaching it to something higher, such as higher values and goals. By allowing the mind to rest on higher principles and goals and creating the protective barriers of discrimination and renunciation, we make better choices.

In your day-to-day life, be mindful of the sequence of desires. The sequence starts with a simple wish. From wish, it moves to desires; from desires, it moves to expectations, which leads one to demand that their expectations must be fulfilled. Demands then lead one to insist, “It is my right.”

When you start demanding, you fall—you literally fall—in your own eyes. Your heart knows what you are doing is wrong, but your ego prevents you from correcting the action. If this tendency continues, then it leads to self-isolation and guilt. That’s why, if you notice, the prayer in Heartfulness has the line “wishes putting bar to our advancement.” The wisdom behind this line is to address the root cause: our wishes.

This flow from desire to demand to deserve (and the accompanying guilt) corresponds to the remaining three points: points A, B, and D. Understanding the flow will make you self-aware and help you take the actions needed to eliminate the root causes for triggering samskaras.





Points A and B: Possessions and Sensory Experiences


Let’s do an experiment together: I want you to take a piece of paper (this can be in your meditation journal or elsewhere) and divide the page into two columns. In the first column, write your likes, and in the second, write down your dislikes. Your list could have likes that include a luxury car, nice espresso, vacations, hot yoga, time with family, and so on. And in the column of dislikes could be falling sick, losing a loved one, heartbreak, pineapple on pizza, and so on.

Once you have at least ten items in each column, analyze the list. You will notice two things. First, your likes and dislikes reflect your desires. We all want what we lack. The desire for a car, the warm relationship, a great career, closure from pain, and more money are all our desires to fulfill a perceived lack in life. The second thing you will notice is that most items fall into two categories: possessions or experiences. For example, an espresso, hot yoga, and a cold shower are experiences. A luxury car, a cashmere sweater, and a vintage record album are possessions.

Desires about possessions, power, status, and worldly things disturb point A. The more you insist on having that watch, that promotion, that vacation, whatever it may be, the more samskaras you create. What disturbs point A most of all is jealousy. Your friend or a family member buys an electric sedan—one of those sleek ones from Mercedes—or a vacation home in Bora Bora, or achieves great success in their career. Do you think, Why them and not me? Do you question their deservingness? Such feelings linger for a while, and if they get out of hand, then point A is disturbed, and conditioning is reinforced.

Point B, on the other hand, is more closely aligned with sensual likes and dislikes. Cravings of all sorts fall into this category. When you overindulge in your sensual urges, the vibrations ripple to point B. Sexual obsession is the most prominent. Attraction is natural, and it ensures that the species propagates. But when desire gets out of hand, the mind becomes restless. Lustful thoughts bombard the mind, and the other becomes a mere object to satisfy one’s passion. Brooding over such thoughts creates samskaras.

Whether the desires are related to possessions (point A) or experiences (point B), we are aware of our indulgence. The inner voice keeps tugging at us to moderate. But human emotions are complex, and it’s difficult to break free from habits and tendencies. Most of the time, guilt develops when we ignore the inner voice and indulge. It’s not that sex is bad or buying a TV or a car is excessive. But when your attitude is indulgent and selfish, it creates samskaras of guilt.





TRANSCENDING LIKES AND DISLIKES


There is nuance, of course, to dismantling our likes and dislikes. While a strong attachment to worldly power, possessions, or sensations is a problem, resisting worldly life causes its own disturbances. Both likes and dislikes, attachments and resistances, cause samskaras. From the example of the two wings of the bird, when any of the points are disturbed, the bird flies around in circles. Your consciousness is blocked, and growth slows down. But when we look up to a higher goal and fix our attention on it, we rise above the likes and dislikes and allow our consciousness to grow.





Point D: Guilt


All the samskaras of guilt are stored at point D. Guilt creates extreme heaviness in the system. There are many reasons why guilt develops. One common reason is when we ignore the voice of our conscience. When the heart says no, and we go ahead anyway, then we develop guilt. Our ego may brush off the thoughts, but the guilt lingers, settling down at point D.

Guilt also forms because of inactions. The errors of omission form deeper samskaras of guilt than the errors of commission. For example, we let pride get in the way of a well intended apology. Later on we feel guilty. Or consider another example in case of adults who suffer from the guilt of not caring enough for their aging parents. After the parents have moved on, the guilt becomes overbearing, and then they feed the poor and carry out other acts of charity in the parents’ name. While charity gives some temporary relief, the emotional burden—the samskara—remains.

To avoid guilt, do your best with all sincerity. It may entail more work in the short term, but it will keep your conscience clear, and you will feel good about your life. Regret is a powerful tool to dissolve guilt. Try this: At nighttime, offer a prayer in the most supplicant mood, regretting any mistakes made unknowingly. Resolve to correct the mistakes made knowingly. When you introspect and regret with full sincerity, the energy trapped in guilt transforms into an uplifting force for change. Shed a few tears while you pray, and the emotional lightness will be of a different degree. You can test for yourself the truism of the Jewish proverb “What soap is for the body, tears are for the soul.”





SHAME AND GUILT


Besides the errors of omission and commission, there are other actions that cause guilt. These are actions of trauma and abuse in which you endure severe hurt because of your actions and the actions of others. Think of the soldiers who suffer from PTSD and other diseases of despair; they feel guilty because they couldn’t save their friends or they killed other people.

In the case of victims of abuse, they are so tormented that they blame themselves for inviting the hurt. They blame their looks, their behavior, for causing the suffering they themselves endured. The sense of shame they burden themselves with is toxic. In all such cases, heart healing takes time, but it’s possible to heal. It’s possible to develop patterns of thinking and understanding that help you achieve closure. Compassion and radical acceptance play a key role in the healing journey.



By understanding the role of points A, B, C, and D in our emotional makeup, we work toward a lifestyle that helps prevent the formation of samskaras. It’s not about giving up desires or avoiding worldly possessions and experiences, but rather transforming the energy of desire by attaching it to something higher. As we work on points A, B, C, and D, we can move toward our evolutionary goals and experience the joys of living in the present moment.





ASK DAAJI


Daaji, I struggle with developing constant remembrance. Do you have any suggestions for me?

I had this same question during my early years of practice. Once I asked Babuji, “How do I progress quickly?” He replied, “Constant remembrance.” Babuji replied in short sentences and long pauses. Usually, I wouldn’t bother him with follow-up questions, but that day, I wanted to hear more from him. So I asked, “Any tips to practice constant remembrance, Babuji?”

“Each time you change your action,” he said, “connect with the heart.”

Let’s say you are reading, and you stand up to get a drink of water. With love and tenderness, connect with the heart. You step out to get the mail, connect with the heart. You start cooking, connect with the heart. You are at work, and the phone rings… you get the idea. Make a habit of connecting with the heart, and the immunity shield of constant remembrance will protect you. Constant remembrance helps you interiorize in the heart, link one meditation to another, and nurture the conditions you are experiencing.





Footnote


i Constant remembrance is also practiced in various traditions of the world. In Christianity, it’s called ceaseless prayer, and in Hinduism, it’s called Bhajan.





11.


Cleaning the Samskaras: Correct Thinking and Right Understanding


Imagine a lit candle. In front of that candle, you place a piece of colored glass. The candlelight now shines through the glass. But, because the glass is colored, some of the light is filtered out. Add another glass in front of the first one—a different color this time. Even less light shines through. Continue adding glass pieces until there are sixteen. How much light will shine through now? Most of it is filtered out. Over time, dust and webs scuttle and obscure the light further. When we start our journey, we are at the outermost glass. We can barely see the light shining.

Now, clean all the impurities that are around the outermost glass, and see what happens. There will be more light coming through. Remove the glass, and even more light comes. As we keep on cleaning and removing the glass pieces, even more light is visible. Finally, we remove the last one and reach the light’s source, the candle.





The candle is the soul, and the pieces of glass are the chakras. We let the soul’s light shine through by cleaning the system and allowing the chakras to blossom. When a chakra blossoms, the energy within gently flows into our center of consciousness, our heart. We feel this energy in the form of conditions created in the heart. In this way, as we transcend the chakras more energy flows through, and subtler conditions are created.

The crucial element is the removal of the samskaras that clog the chakras and energy channels. By now, you have a good understanding of samskaras and how they form. You know that it is the programming from the past that is shaping your present. To create the future you want, you have to upgrade the program. The spiritual anatomy project empowers you to confidently take ownership of what you were, what you are, and what you ought to be. And with this ownership, you seek solutions to the questions “How can I change the programming?” and “How do I regain my pure perception?”





Ways to Clean the Samskaras


There are no good or bad samskaras. They are what they are: blocks that prevent the expansion of consciousness. Going back to the glass pieces and the candle, the candle’s glow increases as you clean the glass pieces. The illuminating glow of correct thinking and right understanding pierces through the darkness of samskaras. For example, you think that someone took your money, and you were upset with them. But later on, you find that you were wrong. The right understanding gives you clarity, and the feeling of regret for blaming an honest person cleans any samskara about the whole episode.

There are many ways to clean away samskaras. The Universe’s default mechanism is through cause and effect, also called karma and bhoga, where the Universe, arranging itself to support your journey, creates opportunities for you to work through your blocks.

Let’s say you and your friend have a misunderstanding that leads to a fight, and you have a falling out. Samskara of unresolved anger and hurt remain blocked inside you. The blocked energy needs an outlet. So, nature creates circumstances for you to find closure. For example, a similar situation occurs when you are again in a standoff. But this time, it’s not with your friend, but with your son or a colleague from work. How do you respond? Do you choose anger or forgiveness? If you choose anger, the existing samskara becomes heavier and the block becomes stronger. But if you pause and respond with forgiveness, you transform anger into love. The unresolved anger and hurt are unblocked, and you instantly feel lighter. Correct thinking and right understanding helped you make a choice that dissolved samskaras.

Many years ago, a French abhyasi who had a tumultuous relationship with her mother visited Chariji. She shared her pain with Chariji and asked for help to heal. At that time, the lady’s mother was in hospice. Chariji asked her to be with her mother and take care of her in the final days. After much hemming and hawing, out of obedience to her teacher, she went to take care of her mother. After a month, when she returned, her face was radiant, and her eyes had exquisite tenderness. She shared the story of how she and her mother bonded and how their togetherness blossomed into love. She recounted that the day her mother died, the room smelled of roses, and her mother’s face was radiant. Even the hospice staff remarked about the lightness they felt in the room. When we allow our better angels to prevail, we grow.

But relying only on the Universe to create circumstances to resolve past burdens is time-consuming. We carry an immense backlog of samskaras, and we keep adding to our burdens. We’ve accrued so much that one lifetime isn’t enough to resolve everything. And whatever is left, the subtle body carries that burden from one life to another.

I said earlier that there are many ways to clean oneself and let go of the past. Besides cause and effect, the other options are active interventions. These include therapy, past life regression, eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), and self-hypnosis, among others.

Whatever practices of healing and self-reflection you may be using, Heartfulness cleaning (as described here) complements it. It will act as a force multiplier in your efforts, and you will be amazed at how you heal and emerge stronger. The unique aspect of cleaning is that it frees you from the pain of recollecting whatever needs to be cleaned. You don’t focus on the pain. You don’t relive the trauma by bringing it to your awareness. Instead, you offer a nonjudgmental affirmation that all complexities and impurities are being removed. It’s like a refreshing dip in the waters of purity and love, and one emerges rejuvenated.

Besides doing cleaning on your own, when you take sittings (either on the app or with a preceptor), most of the work is cleaning. Thoughts from the distant past pop up: the math exam in high school, memories of the childhood home, flashing images of holidays and other events, and so on. These are hints that any blocks created from those times are being cleaned away. As you go deeper into your practice, samskaras from the distant past are also cleaned away.

Cleaning and meditation help you understand causes and effects. They raise the height from which you were looking at the situation, and now you have a much better picture of the surroundings. Earlier, you were in the valley, and now you are higher. Cleaning and meditation nurture understanding. Samskaras are erased because of understanding. It is through understanding that we let go of the past.





Offense and Defense: Cleaning and Lifestyle


As part of the Heartfulness community initiatives, we have a national campaign in India called Forests by Heartfulness. The goal is to plant at least 30 million native and endemic trees across India by 2025. It’s a vast grassroots movement with teams of climate experts, arborists, scientists, botanists, conservators, and community organizers. One day, the chief engineer of a large city asked for our team’s help in cleaning up a lake and restoring it. He had heard of our work and knew that some members of Forests by Heartfulness are experts in lake rejuvenation. I asked the chief engineer how the lake got polluted in the first place, and he told me of the condos all around the lake that dumped their sewage into it. I told the engineer that cleaning the lake would be an expensive and temporary affair. The sewer inflow had to be fixed first.

Our hearts also have become like this lake: We dump all kinds of rubbish into its hallowed grounds. Unless we stop the sewage, it doesn’t matter how often we clean the lake, it becomes a Sisyphean affair of cleaning oneself repeatedly. So, we need to cultivate a lifestyle that protects us. We need to cultivate the right attitudes and effective habits. A regularity in practice helps us defend and nurture inner purity.

Also, please be kind to yourself. Change takes time. Even if the samskaras are cleaned from the system, the habit is etched in the synaptic connections. Some of those habits may have become tendencies in your behavior. It takes time to rewire oneself. So be patient. Especially when dealing with deep hurt and trauma, be extra compassionate to yourself.

The early days of practice are crucial. You can lay a strong foundation for your journey in the initial days. This is an opportunity to create a flow in your practice. The flow, or automatism, gives you the much-needed escape velocity to break free from the bondage of samskaras. Meditate regularly, clean in the evenings, and offer prayer at bedtime. Once a week, get a meditation session from a preceptor. Do this for ninety days and see the results. And if you have been meditating for a long time and feel that you didn’t give it your best in the initial days, it’s okay. Press the reset button and think of yourself as a beginner and restart. In the journey toward infinity, treat every day as day one.

A helpful tip for you on maintaining inner hygiene. Let’s say you are in a restaurant, having lunch with colleagues. Some marinara sauce falls on your white shirt. What do you do? Do you wait till you get home that evening and then clean the shirt? You scramble to remove the sauce from the shirt right away. You try to clean it with a napkin and some water. When you get back to work, you grab a stain remover and try to clean the stain further.

Why would you treat the inner messes, those that could stain your consciousness, any differently? You can do an emergency cleaning—performing the Heartfulness cleaning found here but for just a few minutes. After an argument with a colleague, email fights, snapping at your child, getting upset with a video you see online, or anything else that topples your inner balance, do emergency cleaning. In a few minutes, you re-center yourself and prevent the formation of samskaras. The momentary pause in emergency cleaning creates the space for correct thinking and right understanding.

There are also situations where nothing has happened yet, but you know something is wrong. You enter the room, take one glance at your partner, and know it’s not good. Or you’re in the office and don’t feel good about the vibe at work. In such moments, distance yourself for a few minutes. Find a quiet spot and clean yourself. It will help you center yourself and avoid getting sucked in.

Cleaning is all about being liberated from the fossilized energies that remain in our deepest core. Developing a mature outlook toward life with a sympathetic understanding that can make our hearts more accepting and open will happen when we find a release from the trapped energies that enslave us. A mature outlook toward life, right understanding, and acceptance are the bountiful gifts of your practice.





ASK DAAJI


How do I know my samskaras are being cleaned away?

A growing feeling of lightness inside is a hint that something that was weighing you down has been removed. You will also notice you tend to pause more before reacting. You make room for correct understanding before reacting to a situation. Keeping a journal helps validate your growth. When you read your journal from two or three years ago, you will find that some of your reactions have been tempered or gone away. You will also notice changes like lightness, softness, kindness, and a tendency to be more forgiving.

You will also notice a greater depth in your meditations. It will also be easier for you to slip into meditation faster. One other unmistakable sign of samskaras being cleaned away is that you interiorize more and seek the counsel of your heart. You feel the growing recognition that the heart is the place where you should be permanently operating from. You are keen on leading your life from the heart and continue to explore greater depths within. All these signs indicate that the complexities and impurities inside are being removed.





MEDITATE AND TRANSCEND





PART 6





THE HEART REGION





12.


Five Chakras of the Heart Region: The Realm of Opposites


When I use the word heart, don’t think of it as the pump in the body. The physical heart represents the heart chakra, which is the custodian of many mysteries. It is the vehicle that transports you to higher levels of consciousness. And why? Because the specialty of the heart chakra is that it is connected with all sixteen chakras. Just as watering the roots of a plant nourishes even its farthest branches, meditating on the heart chakra ensures work is done on all chakras.

There are five chakras in the chest region. Together, they are like a constellation and form a region of consciousness called the Heart Region. The Heart Region represents the five elements our elders say are the Universe’s building blocks: earth, space, fire, water, and air. From animated series for children to Hollywood blockbusters, mastering the five elements through rings, stones, and other tchotchkes has been a popular storyline. In reality, mastering the Heart Region gives you mastery over the five elements. Does that mean you fly in the air and spew fire on evil powers? No. Sorry. You do something more remarkable and less gimmicky: You overcome the tendencies that have kept you tethered to lower levels of consciousness. You break free from limitations and arrive at real freedom. I’ll explain.

The Heart Region is the collective consciousness of the human condition. It represents the everyday you, me, and everyone who grapples with life’s daily struggles and joys. Our desires, insecurities, fears, worries, joys, pleasures, feelings, emotions, indifferences, strengths, weaknesses, and prejudices all come together in the human condition’s melting pot. The mastery over the Heart Region symbolizes mastery over the human condition. In our transformation, going from mass to energy to the Absolute, crossing the Heart Region means expanding our awareness beyond materiality to a subtler level.

Mastering the Heart Region gives you the momentum you need to continue your journey to the Center. It ensures you build enough strength to reach the final goal, which lies far ahead. It’s like the mountaineer who spends a long time scaling smaller summits to prepare for scaling the big one. And what is the time spent on? Most of our samskaras are deposited at the heart chakras. You spend time cleaning the region and allowing the chakras to blossom, giving you strength and confidence for the journey ahead. When you cross the Heart Region, you outgrow the instinctive nature and become a generous and benevolent humane being—liberated into a level of consciousness that we could call real freedom.

Babuji used to say, Freedom from freedom is real freedom. I know it’s bendy, so stay with me here. To understand real freedom, we should understand the idea of freedom. Health is freedom from disease; when we are healthy, we are happy. Love is freedom from hate, wealth is freedom from poverty, and freedom gives happiness. But the freedom that comes because of something is conditional freedom. When you cross the Heart Region, you arrive at real freedom, free from all conditionality. You are free because it is your nature.

The yogis have a name for real freedom. It is called liberation, kaivalya, nirvana, mukti, and so on. Liberation is freedom from the bondage of opposites. Such a state creates immense poise in one’s being. By throwing a pebble, you can create ripples in a pond—but try creating ripples in the ocean. No matter how hard you try, the ocean stays in its rhythm. A liberated person is like that, deep and unshakable. They have transformed a human existence into a humane one. Such people impose on no one, and they demand nothing. Wherever they may be, they radiate happiness and create happiness in others. Their freedom evokes such lightness that others forget their own burden for some time. All this and much more await you at the end of the Heart Region. Isn’t this what we all seek at some level?





The Heart Region: Understanding the Opposites


Opposites characterize our world: night and day, positive and negative, hot and cold, joy and sorrow, life and death, and so on. The opposites are a part of the world’s design, and the five chakras of the Heart Region embody this.

At each chakra, samskaras of opposing emotions are collected. For example, samskaras related to contentment and discontentment are collected at the first chakra. Similarly, samskaras related to calmness and disturbance are collected at the second chakra. The image below shows the types of samskaras that gather at the five chakras. An easy way to remember the opposites is to think of them as the five Cs and five Ds of the Heart Region.

How we feel at any time depends on the swings of the five Cs and five Ds. We may feel content at one level and disturbed at another level. We may feel outwardly calm but also feel displeasure deep within. Thus, our emotional state is in a flux, causing instability. The main culprit for instability is the samskaras. For instance, if a samskaric wish is fulfilled, the field of the first chakra vibrates with contentment. But, if that wish remains unfulfilled, the same chakra will vibrate with discontentment because now those samskaras are active. Any chakra can tolerate disturbance in the energy field to a certain extent. But if the emotion is intense, the excess emotional energy ripples over to other chakras. It is like the water basins that collect stormwater at different locations to mitigate the intensity of a flood.





Consider this scenario:

Your job leaves you dissatisfied and unmotivated. This discontentment can trigger samskaras at the first chakra, leading to a distorted energy field. If left unchecked, these emotions can trigger further samskaras at the second chakra, causing disturbance and instability. To keep this from affecting your performance, it’s important to change your working style, take help from colleagues, or consider a different role.

If the disturbance persists, it can trigger samskaras at the third chakra, leading to prolonged displeasure and eventually discouragement at the fourth chakra. This can leave you feeling blocked and fearful, triggering samskaras at the fifth chakra and causing delusional thinking and mistakes at work.

Such a cycle of negativity can affect your performance, spoil your relationships with coworkers, and reinforce unhealthy behaviors. It’s essential to recognize the five Ds (discontentment, disturbance, displeasure, discouragement, and delusion) and break away from the cycle before it spirals out of control.

Discontentment Disturbance Displeasure Discouragement Delusion

Chakra 1     Chakra 2   Chakra 3  Chakra 4    Chakra 5



Reflect on the sequence of events with situations in your own life. Think of the times when you felt angry or upset, the times when you felt discouraged or fearful. Analyze these events and see how they came to be. Why did you lose your composure? What emotional states did you go through? Arguments, gossip, bad traffic, or anything can trigger the relay race from discontentment to delusion in seconds. When you break down the process, it seems long and drawn out, but in day-to-day life, these steps are a chain reaction. They happen as if you have no control over your emotional response.

We lose control because the samskaras at these chakras are triggering your response. The emotional energy trapped in these samskaras is unleashed, and before you realize it, the cascade of emotional reactions is underway.

Now, just because the five Cs and the five Ds sit in opposition does not mean that the Cs are good and the Ds are bad. Both the Cs and the Ds are a result of the samskaras that gather at the chakras. The dominance of any of the five Cs and five Ds indicates that the system is off-balance, and you need to center yourself. For example, let’s go back to the sequence of emotions and consider the opposite sequence with the five Cs.

Let’s say you were gunning for a promotion, and you got it. What happens? Your ego is thrilled. Suppose you begin to gloat about your success and feel superior to your peers. What happens to the first chakra if the gloating feeling persists? Your ego creates an imbalance, and the first chakra attracts samskaras of attachment. You start feeling entitled, a negative shade of contentment.

An inflated ego also disturbs the balance at the second chakra, where the feeling of calm gives way to smugness, a characteristic of arrogant behavior, where even small things disturb you. If such behavior continues, you care less about other people’s feelings. In such a heart, compassion suffers. As a result, now your third chakra is disturbed.

So even small disturbances now make you insecure. Fear creeps in, and you become defensive, disturbing the fourth chakra. Do you think there will be clarity of conscience when there is fear and insecurity? There is only confusion and unfounded worries. The fifth chakra is now off-balance, and the chain of samskaras continues. When likes and dislikes sway you, disintegration is bound to occur.

As I said earlier, whether it’s chains of steel or gold, they both tether you. If you’re thinking that the pattern of triggers and cascades of emotion sounds like a primer in modern psychology, you wouldn’t be far off. The belief that our past experiences subconsciously determine our experience of the present is widely held as the basis of most therapeutic work.

The concept of locating emotions on the body is finding greater acceptance in the scientific community as well. Emotional body mapping is an emerging area of research; scientists have created body maps for thirteen emotions including happiness, anger, fear, disgust, love, sadness, and so on. The striking aspect of these studies is that all the emotions are viscerally felt in the chest region, which corresponds to the knowledge you now have on the spiritual anatomy. Studies also show that the stronger the feeling in the body, the stronger the emotion.13

But the origins of this knowledge can be traced to five thousand years ago. In the great Indian epic, the Bhagwad Gita, Lord Krishna spoke of this sequence of events:

When a human being dwells on the pleasures of sense, attraction for them arises in him. From that attraction arises desire, the lust of possession, and this leads to passion and then to anger.

From passion comes confusion of mind, then loss of remembrance, the forgetting of duty. From this loss comes the ruin of reason, and the ruin of reason leads a human being to destruction.14



Remarkable, isn’t it, to see how science and spirituality converge and offer insights that guide us on the path of inner development?





Overcoming the Opposites and Generosity of the Heart


You may have seen kids play on a seesaw. They keep going up and down. Only when the kids are playing does the seesaw move up and down. Once the seesaw is left in balance and undisturbed, it stays that way.

A chakra, too, tips from one end to another when samskaras create imbalance. Your regular practice helps clean the samskaras over time. In addition, constant remembrance shields you from the effect of likes and dislikes. As a result, for the most part, chakras operate in harmony.

But some situations sneak by or some deep anguish that takes time to heal can continue to bother you. In a moment of weakness, you may lash out at someone, brood over something, and set off ripples inside. How to vaccinate oneself from the samskaras and their aftereffects? How to continue the healing journey?

I pondered these questions for many years, and one day the answer came to me in meditation: Cultivate generosity. It is the key to mastering the Heart Region. Generosity is often understood as sharing your possessions and wealth with those who may need it. This is a narrow definition of generosity. The generosity of heart is about how well we accept our differences. Is your heart generous enough to accept the mistakes of others? The shortcomings of others? Forget others—what about accepting your own mistakes? Are you generous enough? Many a time, we cannot forgive ourselves. We may be unkind to others, but most of the time we are harsh on ourselves. The likes and dislikes are not reserved for others alone. They are also directed toward ourselves.

Generosity is acceptance of reality. By accepting the reality of life, people, and situations, generosity paves the way for understanding. You now understand why people do the things they do, why circumstances come into life and the role they play. You understand yourself better and see yourself fully, free from self-judgment. Your understanding of why things are the way they are helps you manage expectations, both from yourself and from others. Through generosity you overcome the sway of emotions and master the heart chakras.

Mastery over these chakras means mastery over the swings of the opposites. The swings become so subdued that the opposites don’t sway you anymore. That doesn’t mean the opposites go away. They remain, but their role changes. Now the opposites work together to act as an air traffic control system. They help you navigate the traffic of feelings and emotions by issuing alerts that encourage or warn you.

For example, when you feel fear emanating from the fourth chakra, treat the feedback with the importance it deserves. It’s a signal from the heart to avoid an act you may be considering. Similarly, in relationships, when you feel vibrations at the second chakra, and you feel peaceful, you know there is a heartfelt resonance in that relationship. At such times, there will be lightness or a feeling of softness at the second chakra.

While feeling peace within, if you also feel vibrations at the third chakra and the feeling that you are melting away, you can infer that this relationship will be a soulful one. A final confirmation is the heart feeling free, burdenless, expansive, light, and joyous. This feeling comes whenever something good for your evolution is going to happen. Based on such signals, you can conclude that a relationship will flower and bear fruit.

Furthermore, if when you’re in a person’s presence, your calmness is disturbed and heaviness is felt at the second chakra, know that you need to be careful in such a relationship. With time, if you notice heaviness at the third chakra and also feel heaviness at the first chakra, then know that such a relationship will not work out.

Then there are times when you are making a decision, and it feels as if the entire system is being crushed between two giant mountains moving closer and closer to each other. At such times, please drop whatever you are pursuing. Such a pulverizing feeling inside is an indicator that whatever you are pursuing is not in the best interest of your soul’s evolution.

Be wary of making snap judgments, though. Be alert to the signals from within and distinguish between nonjudgmental feedback of the heart versus noise that comes because one is emotionally entangled in a situation that clouds judgment. A good way to alleviate confusion in decision-making is to listen to the heart’s guidance.

Some of you may be thinking, How do I make sure I am listening to the heart? The answer is simple: When life flows naturally, our heart just observes. But when things feel forced or unnatural, the heart chimes in. For example, when we lie, we feel a sense of unease and fear, and our inner voice reminds us that we’ve strayed from the truth. The more we practice listening to our heart, the clearer its voice becomes. Start small by asking the heart for guidance on everyday decisions, like what to read, how to plan the day, and whether to meditate or go for a run. Operate increasingly from the heart. The more we interiorize ourselves and give the heart a central role in our lives, the more we can learn to trust its wisdom and follow its guidance.





The Five Elements and the Heart


Picasso once painted a series of eleven sketches of a bull. He started with a detailed sketch of a bull and gradually stripped away the details until he distilled the essence of the bull, its spirit, and its energy into just a few lines, creating a powerful work of art. Similarly, as we master the chakra, we distill the essence of each element into its corresponding quality, which expresses itself in our consciousness.

Earth represents acceptance. This is also why we refer to Earth as “mother.” She accepts us all.

Space represents the eternal nature of the soul. Space was always there, and its essence is peace.

Fire represents love, the spirit of transformation.

Water represents courage and flexibility.

Air is invisible, but it enables visibility. It represents clarity.





The quality of each chakra helps us rise above the samskaras that gather at that chakra. By developing the quality of the chakra, we transcend its opposites. For example, to rise above the swings of contentment and discontentment, we cultivate acceptance, the quality of the earth element, the first chakra. Likewise, to rise above calm and disturbance, we cultivate peace. We can see how nature’s design helps us overcome the swings of opposites.

The interplay of opposites is equally evident in the five elements. For example, when the first chakra flowers, we cultivate greater acceptance within. When the water element which represents courage and flexibility is disturbed, such people lack softness. They lack softness and they are rigid.

Similarly, when the fire principle is shrouded behind samskaras, then love is lacking. There is no drive or craving, and such people struggle with self-motivation.

But before you extrapolate from this understanding, I need to point out one risk. Let’s say you feel you’ve lost your drive. You may be tempted to work on the third chakra to spark the fire. Or, to give yourself clarity, you may decide it’s a good idea to clean the fifth chakra.

Slow down. Please.

Spiritual anatomy is an integrated system, and the chakras are interconnected. The best approach for integrated development is to work at the root. Always meditate on the first chakra, the heart chakra. When you meditate on the heart chakra, its intuitive intelligence directs the spiritual energies to work across all the chakras and bring them into a state of integration. If five lights are connected to the same switch, they all glow or dim simultaneously when you flip the switch. Similarly, when you meditate on the heart, work happens across the chakras, and your heart regulates the work. Focus on the essential practices and trust the inner sensei, your heart, to guide the process.

About the journey in the heart, there is one more thing to point out. During your stay here, you catch glimpses of what lies ahead in the form of special experiences. In the early days of my practice, during one of my visits to Babuji, I developed a peculiar state of consciousness that lasted for a few days. In this state, I was totally carefree. Have you seen a dog relaxing in the shade of a tree in the blazing hot summer? Nothing bothers it. It slouches and enjoys the shade while the earth around it is scorched away. Even if someone kicks the dog, it limps away and slumps back again. My condition was something similar. I wanted nothing, and I needed nothing. Even hunger didn’t bother me. If someone gave me food, I would eat. Otherwise, I would meditate, stay absorbed, and relax. This lasted for a few days, and then one day, Babuji looked at me and said, “You should be in this condition 24/7.” I wondered why he said that and how he had such a clear insight into the depths of my heart.

Many years later, I understood why Babuji commented on my condition. I was given a glimpse of the spiritual condition of insignificance (abhoodhiyat). This condition is a very, very advanced state that arrives much later in the journey at the ninth chakra. But while I was still a beginner, I got a taste of it. We get a taste of many other conditions that await us. Such experiences inspire us to look forward to the journey.

Inspiration and experience await you in the coming chapters. The journey at each chakra is described in detail. The conditions that are created in the heart, the feelings one has during the journey, and the changes one notices within oneself are explained. What would help you enjoy these chapters the most is your own practice. Your practice opens the heart to a level of cooperation where you match rhythm for rhythm, step for step, and condition for condition, leading you to resonance with the higher self.





ASK DAAJI


How do I know I am progressing?

The easiest way to know your progress is through two individuals in your life. One is your mother. If your mother says, “You’re okay, my child. You’re getting less angry. You’re less irritated. You’re more regular. You’re calm. You’re empathetic,” and so on, then that indicates progression doubt. When your mother endorses your progress, it’s good. Second, if you are married and your partner says, “My god, what a transformation. You’re more loving. You’re not shouting the way you used to shout before. You’re not as demanding!” that’s another indicator of progress. In essence, spiritual progress can be measured by how we behave with family and friends.

If you have pets, like a dog, cat, horse, or some other animal, then when you meditate they become quiet. Their quietness will also signify your level of quietness, your level of silence, and your level of evolution. Dogs especially are sensitive to your inner condition.

You can also gauge your progress by the small things in life. When you’re washing the dishes, how peaceful do you feel? Or are you just throwing the plates and utensils into the sink, making a lot of noise, and irritating everybody? Do you perform your tasks in a peaceful and orderly manner? Do you feel joy in the heart now and then for no particular reason? While going to bed, do you look forward to the morning so you can meditate? Do you feel that your relationship with the divine is becoming stronger and stronger? These are some signs that indicate inner progress.





13.


The First Chakra: Acceptance





Names Heart Chakra, Earth Chakra, First Chakra

Prominent Element Earth

Color Yellow (sometimes also shades of red)

Location Lower left (chest)

Defining Quality Acceptance

Main Feelings Contentment, forbearance, balance Discontentment, selfishness, jealousy

Points Nearby A, B, C, D

Similar Vibrations 6, 11, and Root Chakra (Mooladhar)

Direction Clockwise



The journey to the Center begins from the first chakra, where the prominent element is the earth. The essence of the earth element is acceptance. Mother Earth accepts all without judgment. The seeker and the saint, the rich and the poor, the wise and the ignorant, all walk the same Earth. She feeds us, clothes us, raises us, and ultimately accepts our mortal remains. When you master the first chakra, you develop acceptance, and at its pinnacle, your nature becomes infinitely loving and accepting.





The True Nature of Acceptance


In 2017, a group of young people from some of the most impoverished nations, as part of an exchange program, came to Kanha Shanti Vanam, our ashram in India. They told me stories of the silent tension in their homes each day as they figured out who would eat dinner and who would skip the meal. Commenting on the food we served in the ashram—a meal of rice, lentils, and bread three times a day—they said it was more food than what they ate in a whole week. But they weren’t complaining or comparing. Over the duration of their stay, they made friends, meditated well, and lived in the moment. When it was time to go home, they were jubilant. An evening before they left, they all showed up at my home and sang songs—an impromptu performance that moved hearts.

These young hearts symbolized what my master said about life: “Life is movement, change, and evolution.” The movement of energy, acceptance of change, and the evolution of consciousness.

Movement, change, and evolution create a flow. Is it possible to flow if you are tethered? The samskaras tether your growth. As samskaras are cleaned, you rise above attachments and resistances by developing acceptance. Acceptance and love are the fulcrums for navigating life with grace and compassion.

Acceptance means allowing movement, change, and evolution. Instead of imposing your will on the Universe, acceptance helps you channel the Universe’s will to allow you to grow and evolve. Acceptance is a wise counselor and saves you valuable time on the journey. It gives you strength and wisdom, and a state of acceptance is the secret of a well-understood spiritual life.

But acceptance is difficult. Really difficult. Accepting the traumatic loss of a loved one, a nasty breakup, failure in a business, strife in the family, and physical and moral violence, life on earth is no bed of roses. Everyone faces trials and problems without exception. Acceptance of others is the basis of good relationships. It encourages us to move past our differences and to accept and embrace people as they are.

While miseries are universal, the suffering can be reduced through acceptance. Denial only prolongs the suffering. Denial means suffering without learning life lessons. Realizing that acceptance is the way is a great breakthrough in one’s life. When the first chakra blossoms, acceptance permeates your being. You don’t have to make mental efforts and practice acceptance. It happens naturally, like a rose whose fragrance wafts with the air.

Acceptance liberates you. The journey from “I am what I am” to “I am what I ought to be” begins with accepting oneself. The inner lamp glows, lighting up the path ahead, making the ascent easier, and elevating the beauty of the soul.





Conditions Experienced at the First Chakra


As I have mentioned, my hope is that this book will be an atlas of consciousness for you. In that spirit, I will share common feelings and experiences aspirants have during their journeys through each chakra. Depending on their sensitivity, some feel these conditions more intensely than others. The goal is not comparison or checking boxes for “success,” but rather to know so that you might experience, and to experience so that you might become. When we meditate on the Heart Chakra, we enliven that bracketed energy and are open to the gifts of a variety of conditions. The most prominent include:





Feeling the Presence of the Divine


At the first chakra, the presence of the divine is felt within and without. This means, when you close your eyes and look within, you feel the presence of something higher. Similarly, when you look at the sky or the sunrise, you feel the pervasiveness of the divine all around. Your heart begins to catch glimpses of something immense during the journey of the chakra. These glimpses are expressed in feelings of awe. You become charged with these feelings and admire nature and its creation.





Poise


The feeling of the pervasiveness of the divine or a higher power kindles a feeling of acceptance. You remain poised during times of calamities and troubles and times of joy and excitement. A sense of balance is paramount in this state. This means no undue attachment to anything. You expend only as much emotional energy as needed by the task. You also refrain from judging people and situations. An equal eye on all is appreciated here.





Kindred Feelings


During this phase, you feel like meditating more. You may also feel like taking more sittings. These are welcome signs. Others who are on the spiritual path feel like kith and kin. You feel camaraderie with them and feel like spending more time with those who share similar goals. The motherly qualities that develop in you make you a caring person.





ASK DAAJI


The qualities express when the chakras open in meditation, and I’m working to imbibe them through the AEIOU practice… so why don’t I exhibit these qualities in my day-to-day life with the same intensity?

The sun shines for everybody, but only those who open their doors and windows will enjoy its warmth and light. When it rains, the farmer who has tilled the land and kept it ready will benefit.

Your cooperation helps you benefit from the gifts of nature. The first level of cooperation is your daily practice. When you practice, you sensitize the heart to the changes you need to make so you can grow. These changes come in the form of inspirations of the heart. Inspirations like “be kind,” “don’t be selfish,” “let it go, don’t react,” and so on. A sensitized heart gives its guidance, and when you follow it, the inner energy of qualities flows along with your actions. If the heart says “be content” and you follow its guidance, then acceptance blossoms in your consciousness.

But because of samskaras, the complexities and impurities create inner resistance. There is constant adjustment you make to let the heart prevail in such situations. The more you adjust and cooperate, the faster you will see the development of qualities. That’s why some people transform fast while others spend years at it and the inner change still struggles to express itself in the outer behavior.

Let me also remind you that when you get involved in the self-development journey, you are busy working on yourself. You may not notice how far you have come, but those around you remark about your poise. They complement the positive energy you carry.

The key here is to cooperate and keep moving, knowing fully well that when you take one step toward the goal, the Universe leaps to welcome your next step.





Discernment and Renunciation


As your samskaras are cleaned away, the heart becomes sensitized and you begin to experience everything with greater intensity. So, while you experience contentment, acceptance, forbearance, and balance, you will also experience their opposites: Discontentment, selfishness, jealousy, and denial. The key is to accept, process, and move on.

How do you do that? Through discernment and renunciation. They begin with the first chakra and continue to be refined as you progress on the journey.

Discernment is distinguishing what is beneficial from what is detrimental. When the heart is free of samskaras, its voice becomes clearer, and you receive guidance from within about what actions to take and what to avoid. As you advance, your discernment expands to include thoughts, helping you cultivate the positive and reject the negative. Ultimately, discernment works at the level of feelings, guiding you from a place of inner wisdom. (Remember: Feelings Thinking Actions.)

Renunciation is not about abandoning your job, family, or possessions, but rather putting aside the undue attachments that burden you emotionally. Renunciation is a state of loving detachment in which you focus on what’s important and distractions lose their power over you. By meditating with love, you can cultivate the state of flow and clarity needed for renunciation and discernment to emerge. It’s essential to take the early days of practice seriously, as any deficiency in practice during this time can have repercussions at higher levels.





Restlessness Increases


I know, it sounds contradictory, but as you journey through the first chakra, you may feel some restlessness. This is natural. As I described earlier, restlessness is an expression of the soul’s eagerness to keep going further. A discerning mind can feel the difference between restlessness for the goal and the restlessness that arises from disturbance. Even if restlessness arises from mundane matters, you can now deflect it to propel your journey. Your poise helps you navigate the period of restlessness and helps you to progress further.





Reflect on the experiences, qualities, and feelings at the first chakra. So much to experience and if the beginning of the inventure is so action-packed, imagine what awaits you as you reach higher levels of consciousness.





SELF-REFLECTION


To have a deeper appreciation of the qualities you develop at this chakra, consider writing two or three sentences that reflect your inner state and feelings. Take the time to answer the questions honestly, without judgment or fear of confronting difficult emotions. Periodically review your answers (ideally every six months) to gain insight and track your progress on your personal and spiritual journey.

Think back to a time when you were open to listening to the feelings of another person. What was the condition of your heart during this time? What did you learn from this experience? What did that feel like?

Think of a time when you resisted a difficult situation in your life. What did that feel like? What did you learn from it?





14.


The Second Chakra: Peace





Name Soul Chakra, Second Chakra

Prominent Element Space

Color Red (pinkish hue)

Location Lower right (chest)

Defining Quality Peace

Main Feelings Calm, kindness, peace Disturbance, aversion, restlessness

Similar Vibrations 7 and 12

Direction Counterclockwise



In the body, the settling place for the soul is the second chakra. For this reason, the second chakra is also called the soul chakra or the spiritual heart. At the second chakra, you experience the qualities of the soul, such as peace and compassion. You feel the presence of the soul, and its expansiveness dissolves the limitations of selfishness. The concept of mine and his or hers or theirs becomes meaningless. You feel a sense of equality in your heart, and there is peace.

What propels the move from the first to the second chakra is devotion.i

Each heart chakra represents a higher level of devotion developing within you. Devotion for whom? you may wonder. For what? The word devotion is derived from Latin, and it means “to vow your loyalty.” As we journey toward the center, devotion is directed toward the goal: When you commit to the goal with devotion, the motive force of your soul propels you onward. Bodies connect through touch. Minds connect through thoughts. Hearts connect through love. And souls connect through devotion. The connecting link that the soul carries with it, the silken, invisible thread of connection it has with the Center, is devotion. Devotion shows up in day-to-day life in many forms. Your growing self-discipline, interest in the practice, sense of reverence, love, and restlessness are all signs of growing devotion. Growing devotion is important because as you move from one chakra to another, the ascent becomes increasingly difficult. Besides samskaras, there are other factors at play that test our resolve on the inner journey.

First among these are the curvatures of consciousness. These are like whirlpools that lure you in and keep you blocked. For example, you may enjoy the peaceful condition of a chakra or the strong flow of power at another chakra, and you want more of the same. Attachment to a state of consciousness creates bondage. You get stuck there. I often get requests from meditators who want to be “knocked out in meditation” or “drowned in peace.” Imposing conditions on what experience you want in meditation is an early sign of curvature. So meditate with an open mind, and please look out for any preconditions that you may be imposing on your meditation.

Devotion helps you escape the curvatures by creating restlessness for the goal. Besides curvature, the upward ascent is made difficult because of ego. “I am such a good meditator,” “My meditation is the best,” and “I am better at overcoming samskaras than others” are some pitfalls of ego. Be vigilant in detecting such thoughts and cultivate an attitude of humility. Your devotion to a larger vision and a goal that inspires you will help.

Some may be wondering why we face these obstacles in the first place. The spiritual anatomy project is for self-transformation. The Universe should support you in such efforts. Why face obstacles, then? Once the samskaras are removed, it should be smooth sailing.

What you think of as obstacles are actually protective barriers designed by Mother Nature. Suppose there were no obstacles. Imagine all the chakras connected in a straight line flowing down from the Center to the heart, blocked only by samskaras. I don’t think anyone could withstand the flow of that energy! It would be like releasing billions of gallons of water behind a dam, in one go, by blowing up the dam. Everything would be swept away.

To avoid shattering the system, the energy is modulated so it becomes tolerable. Little by little, you increase your capacity. Regular practice, constant remembrance, and actively maintaining your meditative state (AEIOU) all enhance and expand your capacity. The guru, in the background, prepares the field at each chakra, so there is less resistance at the consciousness level when you arrive.





The Paradox of Peace


The second chakra is the spiritual heart. The intensity of your craving and increased devotion makes your path clearer and brings you to this refined world of finer vibration. The prominent element at the second chakra is space—the primordial element of nothingness. When we create the condition of nothingness within, the result is peace.

However, many of us mistake satisfaction for peace. For example, if you miss your morning exercise routine, you may feel restless all day. But when you exercise the next day, you feel satisfied. Most people, when they are satisfied, think they are peaceful. The peace at the second chakra is beyond satisfaction and dissatisfaction. This type of peace creates a spiritual restlessness where there is a sense of calmness on the surface, but a deeper yearning remains.

Entering the second chakra often causes some restlessness, as your subconscious resists the shift. It’s similar to a child’s behavior when she has to change schools because of a parent’s job relocation. The child doesn’t want to leave her house, neighborhood, or friends, and she may say, “I’m not changing my school.” Even moving up a grade in the same school can be challenging for some children.

It’s a similar experience for you at the second chakra where your subconscious temporarily resists. The most common sign of inner resistance is that you don’t feel like meditating. You lose interest in the practice because your soul knows that you are about to move schools and your subconscious prefers the comfort of where you are.

Nature demands evolution and tries to push you up, yet you resist. Don’t underestimate this resistance. We resist even the most mundane changes in life. Changing a pillow or sleeping on a different side of the bed is enough to mess up your sleep. Someone swaps your chair at the office, and it isn’t easy to focus on your work. A shift in consciousness is a change at a subtle level so the resistance will be subtle but significant. If you are alert, you can pick up on this inner resistance and realize, “Okay, I’m about to move to the next station.” Many people don’t, and they drop off at this stage after a few months of practice. So, remember, when you don’t feel like meditating, it is a sign. Call your preceptor and say, “I don’t feel like meditating. Can you please help?” If a preceptor isn’t nearby or it’s inconvenient for you, then use the Heartfulness app and take a few sittings.

Also, now that you know you’ll face some resistance, you can do something about it in advance. Some meditations stand out where you feel “This was so good,” or “I was completely lost,” or “It was such a beautiful session,” and so on. In your journal, write these experiences in bold letters and add this caption, “Remember this.” Then in your calendar, add three to four reminders in the coming six months. Name these reminders “Read my journal.” When the reminders pop up, take a few minutes to read some pages from your journal, especially the ones where you highlighted your experiences. These reminders will motivate you and help you stay on track.





Conditions Experienced at Second Chakra


The key experience at this chakra is varying flavors of peace tinged with restlessness. While you enjoy the peace, the idea of the peace giver starts taking root. You now want to meet the peace giver, and your devotion takes on a new dimension where the restlessness to meet the peace giver grows.





Feeling of Nothingness and Slowing Down


Once you settle down at the second chakra, you may experience a newer expression of consciousness. The quality of space element, nothingness, can manifest in feelings of wanting and needing nothing. Free from mundane demands, you may become forgetful or carefree, or experience a loss of ambition that may make your family members, or even you, wonder what’s going on. But don’t worry, this is a normal and temporary adjustment period as your consciousness adapts to the inner peace that’s developing. In fact, it’s a positive sign of the inner change taking place. Unfortunately, many people misread this phase and stop meditating, worried that they are losing their edge. On the contrary, your resilience is growing. The calmness and peace of the second chakra help you take things in stride. You make decisions with a cool mind. Taunts, rebukes, and criticisms from others flow by like water droplets on a windshield. As your inner peace grows, call on your devotion and continue your meditation practice.





Ethereal Feelings and Experiences


As you enter this chakra, you may feel a sensation of detachment from your physical body. It’s like being on a planet with weaker gravity, where you can jump higher and move faster with less effort. This newfound sense of freedom may make you feel as though you’re in a realm that’s more ethereal and profound. You feel everything is connected to a higher power. You may even feel like you’re enveloped in divinity, much like a rose drenched in its fragrance.

After a few months of meditation, I felt something similar. I was going back to college after spending the summer vacation at home in the village. I was waiting at the bus stop. It was a blazing hot afternoon, and luckily the bus was on time. As soon as I boarded the bus, everything around me began to dissolve. It felt like the matter was losing its density, and particles were becoming looser. Love permeated the space around me, and divine energy flowed through everything—the air, the seat, the clothes, the people, and even the trees on the roadside. I tried to shake off this feeling. I thought the sun was playing tricks with my head, but all I felt was everything being soaked in the loving energy.

For a good hour I was in this state, and then slowly I returned to my sense of normal. A dervish who was also on the bus observed me. He noticed that I was in a meditative state. When our eyes met, he said, “When the attention of the guru grips the heart, you are carried on the wings of love.” I had started meditation in the Heartfulness Way just a few months earlier. I knew only my preceptors, and I hadn’t even met Babuji, and this was the effect the teaching was having on me. I felt blessed to have experienced the second chakra in such a profound way.





The Taste of Liberation


Earlier I mentioned that crossing the Heart Region leads to liberation, and the condition of liberation starts manifesting from the second chakra onward. It’s similar to driving toward the ocean—even if you are still a few miles away, you start feeling the cool breeze and the smell of salt in the air. Because of the shift in conditions, some people get trapped with the false sense of having arrived at a higher state, and curvature sets in. Remember, this is just the second station on the journey.





Compassion Begins


At the second chakra, you feel the presence of the soul, and that dissolves the limitations of selfishness. The concept of mine and his-or-hers becomes meaningless. You feel a sense of equality in your heart. The feelings of others touch your heart, and you feel moved to pray for one and all. This is the beginning of compassion. On the foundations of acceptance and peace, compassion begins to take root in the heart.





SELF-REFLECTION


Have you had moments in life when you felt at ease within yourself and with the world around you? How do you feel inside as you bring this to mind?

What does the word devotion mean to you? What are you devoted to, and how does that align with your inner growth?





Footnote


i The actual term is bhakti. It conveys a state where intense love, deep dedication, unswerving loyalty, and the highest humility come together to help you achieve your goal.





15.


The Third Chakra: Love





Name Fire Chakra, Third Chakra

Prominent Element Fire

Color White

Location Upper left (chest)

Defining Quality Love

Main Feelings Compassion, poise, love Anger, volatility, irritability

Similar Vibrations 8

Direction Clockwise



There once was a kingdom where each year the people picked a new king. For one full year, the king would rule, and at the end of the year, he would relocate to an island where he would live out the rest of his life and the new king would take over. One year, when the new king took over, he asked some questions about the island. Then he ordered a team to start building a palace there. He also ordered a new city to be built around the island palace—all to be completed by the end of the year. When the time came for the king to make way for his replacement, he left happily to live in the new palace he had built.

There is great wisdom in not settling for temporary happiness. It is pointless to become a millionaire for a day and become a pauper the next day.

This wisdom to not settle for temporary happiness takes root when you arrive at the third chakra. The restlessness that started developing at the second chakra comes into full swing at the third. Your heart is no longer happy with these early visions of peace and acceptance. Now, you are restless for the real thing, and the embers of restlessness spark the fire of love—the very essence of life.





Understanding Love


Love is the engine of the world. It is the most beautiful thing we can give or receive. It transcends the boundaries of this earth and stays with us beyond our physical existence. In the spiritual anatomy project, the fire of love is the transformative energy that elevates our being to a higher level. When we reach the fire chakra, we gain a true perspective of love that is beyond what we previously understood.

In our daily lives, we often refer to human love, which can be painful and leave scars. However, there is another kind of love that develops in us as we progress, which is divine love. It is a flame of pure feeling that can be poured out with confidence and will never disappoint us. Delighting in this love will transform us and those around us.

Divine love is like a rare and sublime flower that we cultivate within our hearts, and its scent can carry us away from everything else. It is the key that opens the doors, a luminous vibration that twinkles even in the least of our cells. As we advance toward our spiritual goal, we become imbued with this energy and feel its effects.

Love rejuvenates our subtle bodies, and at its zenith it modifies the vibratory structure of our being. It is a dimension too subtle to be measured or quantified, and it belongs to a realm beyond the material. I hope that scientific research in this area will help us to bridge the gap between the material and the subtle, and to better understand the pivotal role of this rare and subtle energy.

From love spring many qualities, foremost among them being compassion and empathy, the fragrances of a humane heart.





Love, Compassion, and Empathy


Compassion begins at the second chakra, and when love enters the scene compassion hits a crescendo. To understand compassion, start with its opposite: selfishness or indifference. Selfishness comes from a feeling of “me, mine, and nothing else”—a self-centered state where personal fulfillment comes at the cost of others. On the other hand, compassionate people have no time to think for themselves because the idea of others is predominant. Selfishness hoards, while compassion gives and gives. Despite their opposing effects, both of these behaviors stem from the same source—passion, the energy that comes from enthusiasm and keen interest. If passion is misdirected by our desires, it can drag us down and lead to destructive behaviors. But when passion is directed from the heart, it helps us to evolve our consciousness toward our greatest potential for love, connection, and positive transformation.

Compassion at its zenith operates spontaneously, without any conscious effort to be caring, loving, or kind. There is no selection process, no decision to show compassion to some but not to others. In the animal kingdom, compassion is pervasive. A dog protecting a herd of sheep or goats will start barking when it sees a wolf. Often the dog gets mauled by the wolf. In a civilized society, compassion exists, but its radius is restricted to my own—my family, my sect, my community, and so on. A meditative heart dissolves these boundaries, and over time, you embrace one and all.

One of the most striking examples of ultimate compassion is Lord Jesus. Even in his final moments, he prayed for his tormentors, saying, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.”15 That is the epitome of compassion, where one can empathize and forgive others without resentment or judgment.

The way we express compassion matters. Compassion extended with a heavy heart is not the same as being compassionate with a cheerful and joyful attitude. A positive attitude uplifts both the giver and the receiver. It is also important to be mindful of not burdening others with our compassion. When giving to those in need, it is important to ensure that they do not feel obligated or indebted. One way to do this is to serve anonymously. This can prevent the formation of samskaras in the receiver.

Empathy is a precursor to compassion. When you empathize with others, you feel their joys and sorrows in your heart. Compassion is empathy in action. Feeling someone else’s hunger is empathy, and compassion is taking the step to feed that person. While empathy acknowledges the duality between self and other, compassion dissolves this separation. Dualities begin to fade away as the second chakra flowers. Then, at the third chakra, as love grows, there is no sense of who is giving or receiving, or who is sacrificing for whom. You do and move on.





Conditions Experienced at the Third Chakra


The many qualities of fire include its volatility, its ability to melt and purify, and its ability to ascend. To get gold from ore, we need to melt it. Melting signifies transformation from one state to another. As you meditate, you enliven the latent fire element within you, and experience various conditions, including volatility of emotions, softness of the heart, and ascension of love.





Volatility of Emotions


Most of us carry a heavy burden of samskaras at this chakra. The aftereffects of anger and irritability settle here. Anger is a tricky one, and even advanced practitioners struggle with it. When we are angry, we often cause hurt, tension, and conflict, and often the people we hurt the most are our loved ones. To overcome anger and use it to our benefit, we need to understand anger’s true nature and purpose.

Anger is the energy we need for improvement. When the anger is channeled to disrupt the status quo and improve oneself, it becomes righteous anger. At the third chakra, we understand the true role of anger and learn to channel it toward self-improvement with patience, practice, and a compassionate heart.

A helpful tip for managing anger is to postpone it. Postponing anger is like the ripening of an alphonso mango. The raw green mangoes can cause blisters in the mouth if you eat too many right away—but allow them to sit for a few days, and one morning the entire home is filled with a sweet fragrance announcing that the mangoes are ripe. The next time you feel angry, make a conscious decision to postpone your anger and allow it time to transform. Give yourself some emotional space, and you’ll find that in a short amount of time, your anger will transform into sweet compassion.





SUGGESTED PRACTICE: DISSOLVE ANGER


Sit comfortably and close your eyes. Imagine that you are in a gentle ocean of peace. The waves are soothing and blissful. Make the affirmation that you are immersed in the ocean of peace, and the waves are removing all your coverings of impurities and complexities. Feel the coverings dissolve and lightness grow within.

Do this for no longer than thirty minutes.



By making a habit of postponing your anger, you’ll notice that it becomes increasingly difficult to get angry. Even in difficult situations, you may find that the strongest emotion you experience is pity, rather than anger.





From Solidity to Suppleness: The Transformative Power of the Fire Element


Sometimes we feel vibrant and engaged when interacting with people, while other times we are uninterested or cold. What causes this shift? It’s a lack of fire within us. The fire element gives us vibrancy, dissolves mental blocks, and keeps our inner being supple.

At the third chakra, we experience this vibrancy. We cut through obstacles and connect with others openly and compassionately. We no longer view others solely through a lens of their shortcomings, but rather see the beauty in their imperfections and embrace them fully.

As you progress on your spiritual journey, your focus becomes increasingly fixed on the goal. This intense concentration leaves little room for worrying about the shortcomings of others. Instead, you direct your energy toward working on your own flaws. Through devotion, your heart transforms into a pure and loving space. There is a song in my native language, Gujarati, that goes like this: “Oh Lord, please descend once into this earthly abode of my heart. Once you visit me here, you will be so lost in its beauty that you will forget the home you came from.” These lines summarize the silent sentiment in your heart when journeying through the fire chakra.





Ascend Toward the Goal


Fire has another unique quality. It always burns upward, even when the lighter or matchstick is held upside down. At the fire chakra, your love also ascends like a flame. But toward what does it ascend? Toward that which is higher. Your journey has transformed the wastelands of hatred into green shoots of love. Your heart effuses love that rises toward the Source and is expressed through silent acts of compassion. Your heart melts, and your love ascends.

Many traditions practice fire worship as a symbolic ritual for ascension toward the ultimate love. Through your practice, your heart becomes a holy receptacle that lights up a blazing flame of love. Dwelling at the third chakra, you don’t pretend to love; it becomes your nature.

To end this chapter, I want to share my experience at the third chakra. For years in my journey, I struggled with mastery of the third chakra. I had already had many experiences at chakras above the third, but whenever I thought I would leap beyond, some emotional turbulence or the other yanked me back. Each time this happened, it took lot of effort to lift myself up and keep going. Once Babuji appeared in my dream and told me that once I broke free of the third chakra, my progress would zoom like a rocket. So I kept working at it.

During those times, in 1986, I was traveling with Chariji in India and we were in the city of joy: Kolkata. That evening in Kolkata, there was a ghazal session (poetic verses in Urdu set to music) and the artist sang the songs that Chariji liked. It was a pleasure to watch Chariji listen to music. He would close his eyes and tap his fingers. When there was a breeze, you could see his silver hair sway in the wind as if each strand were dancing to the music. I listened to music, but that evening, I was preoccupied with observing my inner condition.

As the singer hit a high note, Chariji waved his hand in tune with the song. At that instant, I felt the movement from the third chakra to the fourth. It was like a laser beam! An unmistakable feeling of movement etching a straight line in my heart. I looked up and saw Chariji. Our eyes met. My head bowed as my hands discreetly came together in gratitude. He was at a distance. There were at least a hundred people in the room at that time. His eyes acknowledged mine, and he responded with the slightest nod. That was it.

An affirmation of the immense work done in an opportune moment of receptivity. Would it have happened had I not been alert? It could have, but not knowing is the equivalent of not having. Divine knowledge is not taught. It is caught.





SELF-REFLECTION


Recall a recent time when your heart was moved by the suffering or distress of another person. What does this experience tell you about your capacity for love and compassion?

At the end of each day, ask yourself this question: “Did I pour enough love into my day today?”





16.


The Fourth Chakra: Courage





Name Water Chakra, Fourth Chakra

Prominent Element Water

Color Black

Location Upper right (chest)

Defining Quality Courage

Main Feelings Courage, humility, surrender Fear, worry, dismay

Similar Vibrations 9, Sacral Chakra

Direction Counterclockwise



One stormy night, a young man crossed a river to see his beloved. He grabbed on to a log floating downstream and arrived at her home, soaked to the bone. Ecstatic to see him, she asked how he had climbed up to her balcony. He said he had used the rope she had left for him, but she denied leaving any rope. They then discovered that the “rope” was a snake hanging from the balcony. The next day, after the storm had passed, the young man returned home and found that the log he’d used to cross the river, was, in fact, a corpse. Love had blinded him to the dangers and gave him the dauntless courage to reach his beloved.

As we advance from the fiery energy of the third chakra to the calming energy of the fourth chakra, the pitch of love begins to soften. This doesn’t mean that love has disappeared, but rather that it has matured and become more serene. In the third chakra, emotional turmoil can conceal the pure, divine love within us. But as the turbulence settles at the fourth chakra, love comes to the forefront. The fiery energy is calmed by the soothing touch of water.

Upon reaching the fourth chakra, your consciousness shifts, and you feel reassured. Previously, you may have felt like you were pushing forward on your own, but now you sense guidance and support coming to you. Even though it’s a feeling you can’t quite explain, nevertheless it brings calm and marks the start of true courage. As you come to understand that you are not alone on your journey, you feel more settled.





The Courage of the Heart


It takes courage to act on the inspirations of the heart. The courage to overcome temptations, overcome lethargy, and do what is right. Listening to the heart and following its guidance takes courage, and it’s not restricted to grand deeds alone. Reaching for your highest potential by following the heart’s guidance requires courage every day. At the fourth chakra, you start developing this courage. Remember that the Heart Region is the realm of opposites, so while you are developing courage, you are also overcoming fear.

At the time of creation, when the soul came into being, the first samskara it formed was fear. The soul was gripped in a feeling of estrangement, and that created fear. When the soul contemplated Why am I afraid? fear vanished. In our everyday life, fear is often the result of estrangement between the heart and the mind. The conflict between the inspirations of the heart and the desires of ego creates fear inside.

Fear can obscure clarity and love, and replace them with insecurity. This can be seen in relationships where one or both partners are insecure, constantly seeking reassurance through gifts, attention, or demands on each other’s time. Relationships based on fear require constant attention and energy to maintain. In contrast, relationships rooted in love are characterized by willingness to give without expecting anything in return. Love enables two people to communicate volumes with just a look and allows them to support each other effortlessly.

Similarly, the love you merged with in the third chakra gives you the reassurance, and support you need to cultivate courage. Courage does not come from ego. Courage comes from the clarity that love gives. Ego makes you obstinate, while love gives you the courage to be flexible and to make positive changes.

People generally think of courage as the ego’s reaction when we demand equality of status, justice, or position, where we need to engage in an uncomfortable discussion, become agitated, or face conflict. But in its true form, courage is an offshoot of the mother tincture virtue humility. The courage of humble people breaks through barriers. Have you seen the tiny, tender, hairy roots of a tree break through the toughest rock? These insignificant, almost invisible, and powerless roots forge the way for the mother root to drive deeper into the soil and make the tree stronger. In the same way, the most impenetrable ego barriers are broken down by the courage of a heart filled with humility.16

Courage is innate to us, but it can be accelerated in the company of great souls. In the epic Mahabharata, Lord Krishna displays his celestial form to prepare the warrior Arjuna for battle, instilling him with courage. Similarly, the story of young David’s faith and courage in slaying Goliath and defeating the Philistines demonstrates how courage can be given. Courage is a capacity given by nature as and when circumstances call for it. The transference of spiritual power from the Source into our heart is also an example of courage being given. With courage you can wage war on the tendencies that drag you down and rise higher.





SUGGESTED PRACTICE: FEAR DETOX


For the general fear of situations, places, events, and so on, you can use this guided limb-cleaning technique.

Focusing on the left side…

1. Imagine that the divine current is flowing into you through the crown of your head.

2. Draw the current down to your heart. Now let this current move toward your left shoulder, then let it descend down your arm to your biceps, your elbow, your wrist, your hand, and then let it flow out through the fingertips of your left hand.

3. While this flow is going on, think that heaviness, complexities, impurities, and fears are going out of your system along with the flow. Continue this process for two to three minutes, then gently taper the flow.

4. Now again, let the divine current be drawn down from above your head to your heart. Let it continue down through your left lower torso, your left thigh, down to your left foot, and out through the toes.

5. While this flow is going on, visualize that heaviness, complexities, impurities, and fears are leaving your system along with the flow.

6. Continue this process for two to three minutes, and then gently taper the process.



Now repeat steps 1 to 6 to detox your right side.


Affirm and Repeat

At the end of the detox, with confidence, affirm that you are completely cleaned of all fears and complexities, and that purity and simplicity are restored.

If you feel that there is still fear or heaviness in your system, repeat the process one more time.



While courage is important, bear in mind that fear is not always an enemy. Fear, especially of the consequences of our actions, can be necessary to maintain a discerning ability. The fearlessness of terrorists who shed the blood of innocents is a clear case of courage gone astray. When the fourth chakra is activated, courage and fear both play a constructive role in our lives. Courage gives us confidence, and fear allows us to pause and introspect.





Conditions Experienced at the Fourth Chakra


As explained earlier, the reassurance from the heart and growing courage are hallmarks of this chakra. Discerning inner changes can be tricky because qualities don’t develop in isolation. As you grow in courage, you may also become more loving, peaceful, and content. The other chakras are also blossoming, and so their qualities are also growing. At the same time, the opposite qualities also express themselves in your behavior, creating signals and noise.

It’s like finding Waldo, but now you have more context and understanding. Regular journaling helps in keeping track of inner changes. The sections below will help you understand more about the qualities and experiences at the fourth chakra. But how do these qualities express in day-to-day life?





Flexibility and Flow


Flexibility is one of the hallmarks of this chakra, where water is the prominent element. When you look at water, what do you notice? Water assumes the shape of whatever object it is poured into. It adjusts. If there is nothing to contain the water, it flows effortlessly. The fourth chakra demonstrates this same fluidity.

A constantly changing consciousness needs constant adjustment. Without flexibility, adjustment is not possible. Our day-to-day life demands constant adjustment to circumstances. Whether it’s financial stress, demands at work, family situations, or sickness—each day, one thing or another creates a churn that calls for your attention. At the same time, your spiritual endeavors are inviting new conditions to descend. One pulls you inward and the other pulls you outward. It’s a lot of change to manage! And you need spiritual flexibility to keep up with it all.

The fourth chakra gives you the flexibility to adjust and adapt with grace. In fact, you don’t adjust consciously anymore. The adjustment happens automatically. You can say that at the fourth chakra, total dependence on the heart with confidence and courage takes hold.





Humility and Resoluteness


At the fourth chakra, you grow in humility and resoluteness. You will find yourself less stressed and agitated. You are more centered, and you act with greater decisiveness. These changes in you are observed more by those around you and some will possibly share their observations with you. Not that you are looking for external reassurance, but it comes anyway, fortifying your devotion.





Deeper Connection with the Guru


As you progress through the fourth chakra, your relationship with the guru deepens. Having traveled a reasonable distance on your inner journey, you become curious about the system of practice and the teachers who designed it. You discover deeper meaning in the writings you may have read before, and thoughts of kindness and care flow from your heart toward the guru. You feel more open to writing to the guru, exchanging thoughts, and sharing your feelings more freely, especially in your journal.





Letting Go with Love


Surrendering, or letting go, plays a crucial role in our spiritual anatomy project, but it is often misunderstood. To put it simply, acts done with love are akin to surrender. When you think with love, see with love, speak with love, eat with love—these are all acts of surrender. And what do we surrender? The baggage of samskaras that holds us back from expressing our true selves, the hubris that makes us inflexible, and the shallowness that makes us narrow-minded. Surrendering these negative patterns frees us from bondage. The fourth chakra marks the beginning of surrender, and as you progress on your spiritual journey, you can attain newer levels of surrender, enabling you to experience deeper levels of love and growth.

When your consciousness merges with the fourth chakra, that initial fire for the goal changes into eager yearning. Your successful journey at this chakra is marked by refreshing and soothing tranquility. In this time of tranquil awareness, nature sets you onward for the journey.





SELF-REFLECTION


Note an example of when you were receptive to the feelings of another person even though you disagreed with their perspective. Did that take courage?

How does this feel compared to times when you disagreed with a person and were not receptive to their perspective?





17.


The Fifth Chakra: Clarity





Name Air Chakra, Visuddha, Fifth Chakra

Prominent Element Air

Color Green

Location Throat

Defining Quality Clarity

Main Feelings Clarity, discernment, certainty Confusion, chaos, delusion

Similar Vibrations 10

Direction Clockwise and counterclockwise



Paulo Coelho’s bestseller The Alchemist tells the story of a Spanish shepherd boy, Santiago, whose recurring dreams of treasure set him on a quest to Egypt to find it. On the way, he is robbed, takes on petty jobs, befriends an Englishman, falls in love, finds a teacher, and finally reaches the pyramids and starts digging. Only then does Santiago realize that the treasure he sought all along was not in Egypt but back home in Spain, in the ruined village church where he first had the dream.

Santiago’s story strikes a chord in our hearts. Often, in the pursuit of our goals, we jump through hoops and lunge at mirages. Sometimes, along the way, we realize that what we truly seek is within us. The fifth chakra exemplifies this tussle between clarity and confusion, and the power of intuitive insight.

Before I share more about the fifth chakra, a quick recap. Our foray into the heart chakras started in a somewhat simplistic way with an understanding of likes and dislikes. From there, as you read about each chakra and understood their qualities and the conditions that you experience, you likely formed an image of a journey with a neatly orchestrated itinerary: First, you develop acceptance (first chakra) and then attain peace (second chakra). On the foundation of acceptance and peace, you grow in love (third chakra) and courage (fourth chakra). Having developed acceptance, peace, love, and courage in the lower chakras, you then arrive at the fifth chakra, where you can begin to develop clarity.

But while the chapters in this book are necessarily sequential, the journey to the Center is not so linear. At each chakra, there are whirlpools and curvatures. There is the interplay of samskaras. Then there are the traps of ego that ambush you. Like the ups and downs we face in life, the inner journey also has its own flavor of ups and downs.

Here is a mundane example, but it helps make the point. A summary graph of the Dow Jones Industrial Average from the 1900s to 2023 would look like an unstoppable ascent to greater heights. But when you zoom in on the graph, you will see that scattered across that growth are ravines and valleys of financial crises, wars, political turmoil, civil unrest, and more. Zoom in further, and you find that every day, it’s the same story: rising up, falling, cratering, coasting—and repeat.

Our inner journey is similar. The ascent of consciousness is the transformation of imperfection into perfection, impurity into purity, and complexity into simplicity. Each day you are waging war with your tendencies and shortcomings. You try to gain new ground while holding the line and preventing losses.

Then there are times when you avoid the fight. You can take a defensive approach and tackle some of the battles indirectly. It’s the smart way because a head-on confrontation would drain you. Think of it like pacifying a toddler’s tantrum by distraction instead of discipline. The cranky toddler isn’t receptive to guidance, so distraction works much better and is easier for the parent, too.

At the fifth chakra, and again at the sixth, we avoid the fight and do not undergo the four stages of opening at these chakras in the same sequence we did with the previous chakras. From the fourth chakra, our consciousness shifts to the periphery of the seventh chakra. The turbulence of the air element present at the fifth chakra makes it wiser for us to approach from a higher state of consciousness. Let me explain.





Clarity, Confusion, and the Onward Journey


The fifth chakra is the air element, and its nature is to be in flux. Whether it’s the gusts and gales above the ocean, the zephyr in the meadow, or the rhythmic pulse of breath going in and out, the air is never static. There is always some movement, some churn. In chapter 7, I mentioned there is one moody chakra whose rotation is not fixed. It’s the fifth chakra. True to its element, its vacillating nature shows up in both clockwise and counterclockwise motions—always in flux.

In our minds and spirits, the turbulent nature of the air element is reflected in intense swings between opposing feelings. In one moment, you may feel a wave of sadness and tears welling up for no specific reason. In the next, you are laughing at someone’s joke so hard that you begin to cry. Both these conditions are an extreme spike in emotions.

Any samskaras at the fifth chakra cause additional vacillations of the mind, blurring clarity and confusion. Let me give you an example. When you have no one with you, you want company, and when you have company, you want to be left alone. Anyone who has spent a holiday with their extended family knows what I am talking about.

Here is one more example: After working for some years, people sometimes wish to restart their careers. They want to take a sabbatical and use that time to reorient their career. Now, consider this. One fine day, the company you work for suddenly announces layoffs, and your position is eliminated. As bad as it sounds, the abrupt change gave you the opportunity you always wanted: to reset and restart your career.

How would you react?

Chances are that you would feel sour about being laid off. Just because something does not happen on your terms doesn’t diminish the fact that it is still what you wanted. But when you get it, you don’t value it anymore. The grapes are sour when you can’t reach them. The grapes are sour even when you reach them. Such is the dilemma unleashed by the samskaras at the fifth chakra.

In order to shield the aspirant from the emotional swings and from the effects of visions or illusions, in the Heartfulness Way, this chakra is worked on in a cascade fashion. The subtler energy from the higher chakras flows down through the fifth chakra, allowing for clarity to develop while avoiding all the other noise. As the aspirant, you don’t have to do anything to facilitate this work consciously. Your heart’s intuitive intelligence takes care of this.

What you experience will also guide you. For example, if our thought power touches this chakra, we may enter a dreamlike state in meditation. When we try to recollect the experience afterward, we have a hazy memory of it, like a dream. This is a sign that the fifth chakra may have been touched upon during meditation. Aspirants also observe green light when work is done on this chakra.





ASK DAAJI


Daaji, I would like to make better decisions faster. How can meditation help me?

“Compound interest is the eighth wonder of the world. He who understands it, earns it; he who doesn’t, pays it.” Sometimes, I think about this quote (often attributed to Einstein) in a different context: Making good decisions. On average, we make hundreds of decisions every day. When we make good decisions, they have a compounding positive effect on our lives, and when we don’t, we suffer the consequences.

One very important gift of a meditation practice is discernment. A meditative mind can quickly discern, What is good for me? What will help me evolve? What is ennobling for me? When such clarity exists, decisions are made faster, even with less information. As we progress in the Heart Region, discernment keeps getting refined and we experience greater clarity, the quality of the air element.

Often, we think it’s the big decisions that matter most. For example, whom to marry, which career to choose, and so on. But decision-making is not a one-and-done deal. Decisions form a continuum, where many smaller decisions come before and after the bigger ones. When we steadily improve our batting average in making good decisions, we will become better in achieving our goals.

Meditation will help you improve your batting average. It clears the way for the impulses of the heart to surface unobstructed. When we listen to those impulses and act, the decisions we make are good for us.



In our journey to the Center, mastery over the Heart Region symbolizes an awakening of inner wisdom. At the start of our journey, we struggle with the ups and downs of life, the opposites that are part of human existence. As we grow in wisdom, we learn to make peace with the opposites. Over time, we move beyond the limited idea of making peace to accepting life with a cheerful heart. As we continue to grow, the heart’s wisdom transforms cheerful acceptance into unprecedented spiritual openness, where we accept everything as a gift from the higher self to help us transform. We become like the blooming lotus that thrives in the pond water. Others may think the water is muddy or dirty. But the lotus, in its wisdom, embraced the same water and transformed into something beautiful and graceful. Such wisdom makes one eligible for the gift of liberation.





SELF-REFLECTION


Call to mind a time when you responded to a situation with clarity without any need for the drama of your emotions getting in your way. What helped you act with such clarity? How did this make you feel?

Think of a time when you felt guided within, when you just knew what was needed in that moment. Did you trust that feeling?





18.


Freedom from Freedom: The Gift of the Heart


Picture this. It’s evening and you are in your study, absorbed in a book, when you remember that it’s recycling day tomorrow. You speed through a few more pages to get to the end of the chapter, then head out to get the recycling ready. Just then, the dryer beeps, indicating the laundry is done. It’s also time for your tea, so you put the kettle on and head to the laundry. By the time you finish unloading the warm clothes from the dryer, the kettle whistles for your attention. You pour the hot water into your mug and let it saturate the tea bag, watching the brown currents diffuse into the water as you walk back to the study. You settle back into the book and a few pages in, you realize: “The recycling!”

We are all familiar with such a situation. You leave what you are doing to do something else. On the way, you get sidetracked by another task and forget what you originally set out to do. You might brush off the episode as a side effect of multitasking, but a team of researchers at Notre Dame has a more sympathetic view. In their fittingly titled paper “Walking Through Doorways Causes Forgetting,”17 the researchers coined the phrase doorway effect.

The doorway effect refers to the phenomenon of people forgetting things when they walk through a doorway. This can occur because the doorway acts as an “event boundary” in memory. As you move from one doorway to another, your mind discards information that is not immediately necessary, often resulting in forgetfulness.

Why are we discussing the doorway effect? Wait a minute. I’ve forgotten.… Joking aside, think of levels of consciousness as doorways; our descent from the Center to the current level had us moving through many doorways. The change in event boundaries made us forget the original home. We have forgotten why we are here, what is real and what is an illusion, what is permanent and what is temporary.

Your spiritual anatomy project creates a reverse doorway effect, whereby when you ascend through each chakra, a doorway of consciousness, the memory of the original home becomes stronger. As you master the heart chakras, you raise your consciousness to a level where you start remembering what was forgotten. It’s as if you were asleep for a long time and woke up to a new life, a liberated life.





What Is Liberation?


After crossing the Heart Region, your consciousness is mostly free from the weight of samskaras. You have lightened the load to a level where you attain the freedom to choose your next life. This is what liberation means. You could think of liberation as passing from high school to college. Your life here on earth, this dimension, is like a school where you learn the lessons needed to progress onward. Liberation implies that you learned what was needed, and now you can move to a higher level of consciousness, the next dimension that awaits you. While liberation doesn’t preclude the possibility of returning to this dimension, it transforms the experience from a mandatory cycle into a voluntary journey.

Achieving liberation allows you to reach greater heights of consciousness in this life. In the journey, at the second chakra, you start feeling the pleasant effects of liberation, and you attain liberation only after you cross the fifth chakra. But there are many more chakras to cross and regions to cover beyond the fifth chakra. Once liberated, you have the opportunity to keep going and complete the journey.

What happens if you don’t attain liberation? Whatever good deeds you do in your life grant salvation to the soul, which is much different from liberation. Salvation is a respite for some time from the cycle of life and death. It is a period of rest for the soul during which the soul receives help from the spirit guides (the wise ones who train and guide souls) on working through the areas that need improvement. The soul contemplates these lessons and prepares the blueprint for the next life. Once the period of rest ends, the soul incarnates and the cycle resumes. Liberation, on the other hand, confers total freedom to choose when and where you want to be born if you choose to.





What Does It Feel Like to Be Liberated?


You feel free, so free that you’re beyond even the idea of freedom. The recollection of what was forgotten, your real purpose, helps you appreciate life more. By “the recollection of purpose,” I don’t mean that your purpose is as clear to you as spring water, but it’s a feeling of certainty in the heart; you know that an evolution awaits you beyond the objective world. You are in this world, of this world, and aware that the real home lies elsewhere. You start preparing for that home with great enthusiasm.

Think of it this way. There are companies where young management graduates start as interns. They spend a couple of months in each department and learn. The interns are an enthusiastic bunch. They brainstorm, challenge the old ways of doing things, and absorb knowledge rapidly. What makes the interns enthusiastic is that their end goal is clear: Learn as much as I can so I can succeed in the real job. Life on earth is an internship, and a liberated soul recognizes this opportunity in the depths of their heart. They use their time wisely and keep their eyes on the goal.

In the liberated state, one is free from the sways of opposites. You arrive at a state called the undifferentiated state (avyakta gati). In this state, the opposites don’t manifest, and pushes and pulls from the five Cs and five Ds are transcended. They now give you guidance on whether you should act or pause. You know that all the guidance you receive is for your evolution, and this understanding makes you generous.

Generosity is the hallmark of liberation. In all facets of your behavior, generosity shows itself. As I mentioned earlier, true generosity lies in accepting others as they are. There is no judgment about or preconditions for how someone needs to be to deserve your courtesy and compassion. Those who are liberated exhibit generosity of the highest order: the generosity of the soul. By accepting others as they are, they allow the qualities of the soul to flow through their actions and words. Their hearts are open and pure, and they begin to understand the raison d’être of life and everything it brings our way.

Their mastery of the five elements endows them with acceptance, peace, love, courage, and clarity. There is no limit to how much these qualities can grow and how generous you can be. And the biggest beneficiary of all this generosity? You. In fact, the latest research shows a clear neural link between acts of altruism, generosity, and kindness and an increase in happiness and well-being. The increase is greatest when the acts of kindness are toward a stranger, which makes sense from an evolutionary perspective. Researchers studying kindness have found that “our brains are wired to operate better when we demonstrate support to others.”18 Because generosity makes us feel good, it becomes a self-reinforcing habit, which requires less effort. Demonstrating kindness consistently creates new neural connections. It changes our brain.19 As a result, we are kinder, more generous, more compassionate, more connected with others, and happier.

Often when one reads yogic philosophy, one reads statements like “This world is unreal. It’s all a dream,” and so on. You may think they are identifying with a reality that lies beyond this life, but a dream is real to the one dreaming. During the dream, our reality is influenced by the dream. We feel fear, anger, joy, sorrow, confusion, and so many other emotions. When we have a nightmare, we sweat, the heart trembles, and when we wake up, we are shaken up. It was only a dream but the effect was real. So how can something that has a real effect on you be unreal? Next day you have a dream again, and when you wake up, you realize that it was a dream. Same goes for life, which is a reality that you are living.

Something profound occurs when you cross the fifth chakra. You wake up once and for all and break the cycle of dreaming and waking up, which is referred to in yoga as breaking free from maya, or illusion. The maya is the sensory, objective world. In our waking state we are in this world and of this world. As you progress through the heart chakras, your consciousness transcends the narrow event boundary of the objective world and draws nearer to the Center.

Think of a lamp. The burning point of the lamp is the First Mind, the creator, and the shedding light is all creation. As we keep moving away from the lamp, the darkness increases. And the darkness represents the heavier or denser states of creation. In your journey, crossing the various circles represents your swim toward the lamp (First Mind), and you go beyond it toward the Center. To make the journey possible, you needed this world. This creation, which is an illusion you transcend, was part of the plan to help you remember what you had forgotten. So, the question of whether this world is real does not bother you anymore. It is replaced with the grateful feeling that this station enabled your journey onward.





Liberation and Detachment


Some people worry that attainments like liberation might make a person detached from friends and family. They are concerned that a liberated person might not participate in the joys and sorrows of life. This is a misunderstanding. The heart of a liberated person is ennobled with generosity. They live an authentic life guided by the wisdom of the heart.

Let me illustrate this with a story: Lalaji, the founding teacher of Heartfulness, was once conducting a group meditation when the news reached him that one of his daughters, who had been unwell for some time, had passed away. Upon hearing the news, he sat in stoic silence, and a few moments later, tears rolled down his cheeks. One ascetic, also sitting there, commented, “How can a saint in the best condition mourn? How can he shed tears of attachment?”

Lalaji continued to sit in silence for some more time. Then he picked up a few dry leaves lying nearby and crumpled them. As he did so, the leaves crackled. Then he said, “Even dead leaves make a sound when crushed. I am a living human being with a heart. When combined elements are separated, there is bound to be a sound. Such a reaction is natural.” Feelings of love, care, and attachment are natural to a human being—liberated or not. Our journey is moving from human to humane to divine and beyond. In this evolution, you do not transcend the innate realities of creation—you become one with them.





Don’t Seek Liberation as an Escape


Some pursue liberation because they feel tormented by life. Bad relationships, betrayal, too much suffering, war, disease, and other near-intolerable conditions. Some people I meet express their disgust with life and never want to return. They crave liberation out of aversion to this life. I sympathize with that feeling. When you see the worst of humanity, why would you want to be here anymore? When your life feels intolerable to you, why would you want another? But liberation is not an escape. It is a broadening of horizon, where you get a much deeper understanding of life.

Think of it this way. You put in all the hard work, evolve, and at the end of life you are liberated. Then from up above, you see all of humanity suffering. How can your heart, which is now sensitized to the suffering of others, watch and not act? You will strive to jump back into the fray and help your fellow beings. Liberation confers on you the freedom to choose when and how. It also gives you the wisdom that we all rise together. We all grow together.

Liberation also confers you with the escape velocity to move farther and plunge into the next big frontier of the journey, the Mind Region. Resolving the opposites of life frees the soul from the burden of samskaras. With this lightness and purity, the soul now readies itself for the journey onward to becoming one with the Center.





ASK DAAJI


What is the best quality a human being can have?

Many people asked me this question: “Kamlesh, what is the best quality a human being should have?” Three things stand out in my heart: simplicity, purity, and humility. We are all aware of simplicity and purity and how important they are. Rarely do people understand the significance of humility.

In the summertime, when mangoes come up in the branches of the tree, you will see that under the heavy weight of the mangoes, the entire branch touches the soil. If it doesn’t and tries to remain erect, it will break all the branches, and the weight of these fruits will destroy the tree itself.

So, we bow down with the weight of growth, with the weight of progress. We should not become so erect and arrogant. If you lack humility, you cannot be labeled as a human being.

What else do we learn from nature? Take cows, for example. What do they return after taking grass, water, and some nutrients? They give you milk, and even sacrifice their lives. But in contrast to everything they give us, all that the cows take from us is grass and water.

Nature is magnanimous. Everything around us in nature takes the minimum. The input is minimum, and the output is maximum. What about us? We take the best from nature. Our intake is always the best. What should be our output? I will leave you with that question.





PART 7





THE MIND REGION





19.


The Mind Region: A Journey to Humility


When someone asks where we feel things, we point to the heart. If someone asks where we think, we point to the head. But where does your sense of self, your ego, live? You can’t pinpoint a location. That’s because the ego is an illusion. But it’s necessary because it endows the soul with identity.

To appreciate the need for ego, imagine the soul at the moment of creation. It is now separate from the Source. All around it is the celestial boom of creation and the Universe in a state of frenzied expansion. In such a setting, the soul was gripped with fear and the illusion of estrangement. It needed an anchor. So it looked hither and thither and said, “I am.” The feeling of “I” created from that time onward took the form of ego. And in its purest form, the ego gave the soul the support it needed in finding meaning and purpose.

For this, we should be grateful to the ego. But instead, we see the ego is railed against in the harshest terms as the enemy of the soul and the reason for the downfall of a human being. The ego is blamed as the root cause for prejudice, greed, jealousy, dominance, and everything else horrible that humans inflict upon each other and on nature.

But it’s not a fair assessment. Brashness, arrogance, and hubris are all adulterations of the ego. As it happens, the ego can be your best friend or your worst enemy. I find it ennobling to refer to the ego as a dear friend who has unconditionally offered us limitless resources to help us on the march through the Mind Region and toward the Center.

In the coming chapters, as we learn more about the Mind Region, We will clarify the pivotal role of ego in making our spiritual journey a success. For now, I request that you be sympathetic to the idea of ego. Don’t judge it as good or bad. Instead, appreciate the necessity of ego in self-development.





The Trap of Egoism


After the five chakras of the heart, the next seven chakras are all the realm of ego. Having now transcended our earthly opposites (the five Cs and five Ds) and liberated ourselves from samskaras, we are ready to confront just one pair of opposites: Soul versus Source.





This is a vast area of consciousness and is called the Mind Region. As you move in the Mind Region, “I-ness” or “I am-ness” begins to recede, and we anchor ourselves in the Center. Up to this point, our life was centered around I, and the Thou, the higher self, was in the periphery. Now, we are recentering around Thou, and the I is dissolving away, even from the periphery.





What is the higher self, or Thou? It is the possibility of all that you could be, the highest potentiality that your soul can ascend to. Remember that merger is between two like entities, infinity merging into infinity. Your higher self represents the highest possibility that you embody, and your yatra is the journey to actualize that possibility.

The journey through the Mind Region asks us to sublimate the ego to its purest form. In this context, sublimate means “to make nobler and purer.” We are not pushing down or dominating our egos, but rather refining them to a higher status. All of our efforts are directed at changing the form, not the essence. When we work on ourselves to sublimate the ego, we preserve its essence of humility and allow it to manifest in our lives.

The ego creates I-ness, which is your sense of self. Without the sense of self could you imagine I, me, and mine? These “I, me, and mine” tendencies add up in a subtle way, where we start identifying ourselves with all that is “mine.” These identities include my body, my intellect, my evolved consciousness, my family, my wealth, my house, my way of spirituality, my name, my position, my community, my country, my language, and, finally, you and yours (all that is not mine). These identities help us live and conduct our day-to-day lives, so nothing wrong with that. What we do in the spiritual anatomy project is to identify with the highest and lead life from that vantage point.

What you identify with reveals itself in your personality. I often use the metaphor of coconuts and mangoes to explain this idea of identity and personality. Some people identify themselves with their body, strength, wealth, or expertise on a subject: I am so strong. I work out harder than anyone else. I know this subject best. My house is the biggest. And so on. Such identification falls in the bucket of coconuts. Meaning, such people have an ego that is dense and overbearing in its outward expression. Like green coconuts fresh off the tree, these people have tough exteriors. But once you break through the exterior, they are soft on the inside.

Then there are the ripe mangoes. Such people identify with softer aspects of themselves: I am so humble. I am so soft. I am so generous. I am so spiritual. And on it goes. Their outward expression is civil and considered. But on the inside, there is strong resistance to change. Their attachment to how good they are blocks their hearts. It takes considerable effort to dissolve the blocks in such cases. (In a lighter vein, my associates have extended the coconut-mango scientific personality model to include kiwis, peaches, and even pumpkins. I will let your creativity figure out the traits of these categories.)

What’s important to understand is that egoism is a consequence of moving away from the feeling that everything is of the Source. As the feeling that the entire existence is one takes root in the heart, the separation begins to dissolve, starting with the feeling I am a part of this existence, which evolves into We all belong to the same and culminating in We are all one. The latter realization sublimates ego in one go!





The Spectrum of Ego and Its Role


The interplay between your soul and the Source can be described as the space outside a room and the space inside a room. How would you describe that space if the walls were removed and the inside and outside no longer existed? Those walls are our identity—our self-awareness, also called ego. Just as the existence of a room separates outside and inside, the dominance of the ego separates you and the Source.

During meditation, you enter into deeper and deeper levels of samadhi, or the original state, becoming absorbed in its depths. Each time you surface, your consciousness returns with an incremental awareness of your higher self. Over time your awareness can reach a level of soul consciousness, where only the barest identities of the Source and the soul remain. This state represents a threshold that can never be crossed as long as the soul retains its ego-awareness. When ego-awareness is lost, the differences between the Source and the individual soul are also resolved. At this most refined state, the ego constitutes your basic identity. In this state, ego is humility personified.

But in an unrefined state, the ego wreaks havoc by creating fear, insecurity, anger, and so on. But it’s important to recognize that without the ego, we can’t even lift a pin. Our willpower comes from the ego. Confidence comes from the ego. The idea of self-improvement comes from the ego. Our sense of self comes from the ego.

But for all this good, we allow the ego to blow up and take over our lives. That’s where it becomes a problem. A dominant ego becomes unreceptive to the mind’s inspirations. It’s as if the mind is shut out from providing any guidance. The powerful discriminatory ability of the intellect remains unused. Thinking becomes biased and unclear. In such a state where ego has taken over, it assumes the form of arrogance and it decays self-improvement.

Arrogance puts you in a make-believe world where you believe yourself to be perfect, thereby not acknowledging any weakness. Arrogance prevents self-introspection, and you remain deaf to the voice of the conscience. How can you improve then? Think of an argument where all you wanted was to dominate the other person. In such interactions, the ego shuts down all other faculties. All the ego wants is dominance, no matter what the cost. The mind is no longer relevant, and the intellect is used for devious means. In such a state, your consciousness contracts, and the entire system feels heavy. Not to mention the samskara chain reaction triggered across the heart chakras.

However, if properly used, the ego becomes an alchemic ingredient in your evolution. After all, it is the ego that entices us to succeed in our work. By competing against others, you fall victim to insecurity and arrogance. By competing with yourself, you avoid these pitfalls and improve. Without the motivation of the ego, we would timidly accept our imperfections and weaknesses and give up on the goal of self-improvement entirely.

Pursuit of excellence initially because of ego and later because of love endows you with the clarity to take stock of where you are and benchmark yourself against your highest ideal. The ego falls into its right place when you experience something higher and when you have the discernment to recognize it as such. Then the power of ego works to uplift you toward the higher.

When the ego no longer serves itself, it starts applying itself to the work at hand. Let us look at the ego as a spectrum. To brush your teeth, maybe your ego needs to be at 3 percent. To give a speech in front of ten thousand people, perhaps you need your ego to be at 80 percent. But if your ego stays at 80 percent after the speech, it’s now a problem because your ego no longer matches your level of activity. We say that such a person has a bloated ego.20 Or, if your ego stays at 3 percent when you need to give a speech in front of ten thousand people, you’ll fail in your task. What is necessary is a flexible ego, an ego that can rise up to meet the task at hand, and subside to a state of total humility when it is no longer needed, working always in the service of a higher self. There are five words to represent the main shades of the ego spectrum: arrogance, pride, confidence, presence, and humility. These words are self-explanatory except for humility.

Humility is the noblest form of ego expression. It’s a state of total confidence in something far greater than oneself. Humility is often confused for servility and lack of confidence, but it is, in fact, your greatest strength. When you are humble, you acknowledge that you are not the doer, but an instrument that allows a greater power to manifest. A humble heart is like fertile soil, where inspirations bloom effortlessly and without resistance. Our actions become evolutionary, and we perform them automatically, lacking any feeling of being the doer. Forgetting ourselves, we march toward perfection.

To ensure the ego stays in a humble state, interiorize in the heart and melt away in its love. When we open ourselves to love, it creates a beautiful world within our hearts, where we are filled with a sense of lightness and joy. We march confidently toward our goal of perfection. “Know thyself” becomes “Forget thyself,” and in that process, the higher self is revealed. You arrive at the state of yoga, defined as “skill in action.”i In this state, your actions become natural, effortless, and free from deliberation. You derive the best possible results and achieve excellence.

The journey to humility is a steep one. The ego needs something to identify with, and in that process, we hold fast to many of the labels we’ve been tagged with. The journey in the Mind Region is a peeling away of identities that are not real, so we end up with one identity, that which is our authentic self.





Footnote


i Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 2, 2:50.





20.


The Sixth Chakra: Selflessness





Name Ajna Chakra, Sixth Chakra

Prominent Element Earth

Color Mild yellow

Location Between the eyebrows

Defining Quality Responsiveness of the heart

Main Feelings Expansion, relief, empathy, confidence

Similar Vibrations 1 and 11

Region Cosmic, Brahmand



In January 1987, I traveled to India to attend the 114th birth anniversary celebrations of Lalaji, the founding teacher of Heartfulness. A few nights before my travel, I had a dream in which Babuji appeared before me and gave me a sitting. While asleep, I adjusted my awareness and tuned into the meditation. Within minutes, I slipped into deep meditation. When I woke up the next morning, I wrote down my experience in my journal: “In the dream there was gripping absorbency in the pin-pointed ray of transmission directed at my heart. Some work was initiated but remained unfinished.”

After reaching India, I had an audience with Chariji. After the small talk, in a somewhat gruff tone, he asked me why I hadn’t come earlier to India. I was not sure how to answer this question. The celebrations were still a few days out. Also, Chariji and I communicated often. If he needed me for some work, he called or sent a fax (a fax machine was the in thing in those days). Unsure of how to respond, I kept quiet. After some time, I took his leave, still pondering.

The next few days went by blissfully. Thousands of people from all over the world gathered in the coastal city of Mumbai, where the celebrations took place. The meditations during these special events are one of a kind. It’s as if Mother Nature envelops the venue with a blanket of special grace.

After the celebrations, Chariji asked me to travel with him to Bangalore. There, one evening, he was leading a group meditation. There were many people around him. I was standing at a distance, maybe around a hundred feet. When I saw Chariji, I felt waves of grace engulf me. It was such a vivid feeling that I sat down where I was and started meditating.

As soon as I closed my eyes, I felt the waves carry me. This meditation started right where the meditation with Babuji in the dream had ended. It was an unmistakable feeling of continuity, and I knew it was a sign of something important. After meditation, Chariji walked straight to me, and said, “Come tomorrow. I will give you a sitting.” The following morning, a brisk wintry dawn, I meditated with Chariji. As I observed my condition, I realized that I had crossed the sixth chakra (also called the Cosmic Region) and landed at the seventh chakra.

I am sharing this experience not to celebrate my own progress, but to shed light on an important aspect of the guru’s work in Heartfulness. The guru is ever eager to raise the aspirant to higher levels. Even if there is an inkling of an opportunity, the guru will use it to push the student onward. Chariji was eager to take up my case and was hoping to do it in advance of the celebrations. I have seen many instances, over a meal, in an informal conversation, or during a walk, when Chariji would silently elevate individuals and entire groups of people to higher levels. Such work is above and beyond the work that a guru does in anonymity.

When you read the life stories of great teachers, you will find similar examples everywhere. Buddha blessing someone with a mere glance, Saint Therese of Lisieux elevating souls through her words of love, Vivekananda granting liberation to a thirsty soul while taking a walk on the beach, and so on. These stories all emphasize the importance of preparing oneself and being ready to receive the gift of inner change. These stories all make the same point: Enter the field of spirituality with grand ambitions. Come with the thirst to drink the ocean itself. Think big and bold, and, with a heart full of love, proceed on this inventure.





From Movement to Expansion: Hallmark of the Sixth Chakra


In the human frame, if you draw a line connecting the two eyebrows, the sixth chakra is slightly above that line.

As with the fifth chakra, the sixth chakra blooms as a result of work done on higher chakras. We do not progress linearly through the four stages of merger here; the downward flow of power is too intense to permit us to linger. It would be like trying to float leisurely in a rapid. Not only will you not succeed, but you’re very likely to slip down with the current. Instead, the energy we have built opening the first, second, third, and fourth chakras and the support of the guru catapults us straight to the periphery of the seventh chakra.

What this means is that we experience the conditions at the sixth chakra from a higher vantage point. We feel the weather of this unique position while avoiding the inclement conditions that might otherwise create discomfort in our consciousness. Once we cross the Heart Region, the distinct feeling one has is the expansion of consciousness. The journey in the Heart Region is characterized by movement from one chakra to another. Once we cross the Heart Region, movement changes into expansion. Whereas movement is linear and two-dimensional, the nature of expansion is infinitely multidimensional.

It’s the difference between owning a boutique chain of stores and opening a factory to manufacture the products you sell, and a logistics company to operate the warehouses. All of a sudden, you’re operating on a different order of magnitude.





ASK DAAJI


Daaji, I have seen systems and scriptures recommend meditation specifically on the sixth chakra. Should I do so?

It’s true that some scriptures recommend meditating specifically on the sixth chakra. For example, in the Bhagavad Gita, Lord Krishna advises Arjuna to meditate at the sixth chakra. Arjuna was a warrior who fought in the Mahabharat war, which is said to have taken place in 3137 BCE. The sixth chakra is the distribution center of power to all the chakras below it. Arjuna was wavering on the battlefield. He was asked to meditate at the sixth chakra to boost his drive and prepare him for battle. Similarly, other systems that advocate the pursuit of psychic powers suggest meditating at this chakra. I am sure they have their reasons.

My view is this: We are not going into any wars or seeking powers. We are leading normal lives that, though they may sometimes feel like battlefields, require love, not weapons, to win our daily battles. For thousands of years, the great sages have said the heart is the way to God. Lord Jesus said, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.”21 Lord Buddha said, “So with a boundless heart should one cherish all living beings; radiating kindness over the entire world.”22 The need of the hour is to meditate on the heart. We don’t need powers on this path. Power is not what makes a master. An ordinary person requires power to work, but it takes a master to work with no power.





Conditions Experienced Once You Cross the Heart Region


As you journey in the Mind Region, the grip of the ego loosens. As a result, the reactiveness in one’s nature subsides, and the responsiveness of the heart increases. Your humane nature leads you to the portals of the angelic realm, and your soul begins to amplify in potency in a variety of ways.





Generosity Transforms to Selflessness


What distinguishes human, humane, and divine life? To move from human to humane requires generosity, while to move from humane to angelic necessitates selflessness and sacrifice. Generosity is sharing what you have, while sacrifice is giving even when you don’t have. Generosity accepts people as they are, but selflessness dissolves the distinction between people, we are all one.

People with angelic qualities sacrifice without hesitation. That’s why people say, “I prayed, and an angel helped me.” While we can take inspiration from the benevolent actions of Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and other angels, I am not talking about them. Angels don’t know you, and need nothing from you, yet they help you because that’s what they do.

Crossing the Heart Region can bring about a heightened sense of empathy and compassion, cultivating angelic qualities within you. If you notice a pregnant woman while walking down the street, your heart automatically sends a prayer of well-being for the mother, child, and family. Seeing a homeless person on the street, you feel their cold and pain, and you share the soup you bought for lunch. During meditation, when someone comes to mind, your heart sends thoughts of love their way. None of this behavior is premeditated; your heart is in a state of flow where you do what it says and move on. Progress in the higher realms depends on the selflessness you cultivate in your heart and the sacrifice that flows in your actions.





Relief and Renunciation


One of the most pronounced feelings you experience upon crossing the Heart Region is a sense of relief. For perhaps the first time in your life, the pinpricks of likes and dislikes have dwindled to almost nothing, and the emotional turmoil that used to bother you has settled. Your devotion has matured to a level where you sail through storms with poise because you are assured of a higher power guiding the helm. The words God, divine, and Source, which had been intellectual concepts until this point, now become feelings in your heart. Such a new flavor of consciousness brings real relief. Spiritual restlessness is present, but it is subtler and more potent.

The other change one can notice is the refinement in one’s renunciation. As you may recall from all the way back at the first chakra, renunciation is the feeling of loving detachment where you are involved but not ensnared. It starts developing the Heart Region and becomes more refined as you travel the Mind Region. At this stage, the opposites of the five Cs and five Ds no longer sway you, and you are freed from ulterior motives and personal prejudices.





Sacred Sounds of the Heart: Anahat Ajapa


When the first chakra becomes active, it emits vibrations corresponding to the sacred word Aum. Aum is often associated with Hinduism, but it is more than a Hindu symbol—it’s a primordial vibration of space that has been heard by saints and mystics. The arousal of Aum in the heart happens naturally and shouldn’t be forced through mental techniques. As the journey progresses beyond the sixth chakra, the vibrations of Aum spread throughout the body. It is called anahat ajapa, meaning “natural vibration of the heart.”





Shadowy Darkness and Pressure at the Temples


As one approaches the Cosmic Region, some abhyasis, after their meditation, may experience a sense of shadowy darkness. After meditation, when they open their eyes and look at objects, say a chair or a vase, for a few seconds, they seem as though they’re dark. This hints that one is moving away from materiality toward energy. Furthermore, as one crosses the cosmic region, abhyasis may also experience a gentle and soothing pressure on the temples, like a comforting touch.





Again, a word of caution: Don’t try to create any of these conditions mentally. You have nothing to prove to anyone. If you experience any of these conditions on their own, make an entry in your journal and move on. If you do not, that is okay, too. Measuring spiritual progress is not as cut-and-dried as taking your blood pressure and comparing it to last week’s number. Its more nuanced and multifaceted. As you become more sensitive, you’re better able to observe the changes in your inner conditions, attitudes, and reactions.

One more aspect to appreciate when it comes to inner progress is that the more you grow, the humbler you become. Humility, an essential characteristic of a spiritually growing person, helps you compare yourself to a higher ideal and strive to continue growing. Our journey is toward infinity, and the progress we attain is making us akin to infinity.





SELF-REFLECTION


Can you give an example of a situation involving others where you responded with poise, confidence, and the delicacy that the situation required to provide a favorable outcome for those others?

What have you learned about yourself from these situations?





21.


The Seventh Chakra: Stillness





Name Seventh Chakra

Prominent Element Space

Color Mild red / pink

Location Above the sixth chakra, behind it

Defining Quality Stillness

Main Feelings Power, ecstasy

Similar Vibrations 2 and 12

Region Paracosmic, Parabrahmand



There is a parable attributed to Buddha that goes like this: One day, Buddha asked his disciples to bring him a cup of water from a nearby pond. When they returned with the water, Buddha asked them to drink it. However, the water was dirty and murky, and the disciples couldn’t drink it. Buddha then told them to set the cup aside and wait. After some time, the dirt settled to the bottom, and the water became clear and drinkable.

Stillness creates clarity. It creates the space for inspiration to be transformed into insight. Famous people like Archimedes, August Kekulé, and Marie Curie all made discoveries in moments of relaxed awareness where the mind was still and essential, invisible truths revealed themselves.

In today’s fast-paced world, stillness is vital. Otherwise, we miss out on the beauty of life. Imagine a vibrant, velvety rose unfolding its petals and releasing its sweet fragrance into the air. If you are on a flight, you won’t notice a thing. Even when you’re in a car or running at a fast pace, you may not notice it. But if you stand still in front of the flower, you can appreciate its entire beauty. Mind is the fastest thing in the Universe. If the mind is in a storm of restlessness, can you appreciate the beauty blooming in your heart?

Your spiritual anatomy project invokes inner stillness from day one. Meditation infuses your consciousness with a stillness that helps anchor the mind. By the time we arrive at the seventh chakra, the dimension of stillness that reveals itself leaves us spellbound. This region is also called the Paracosmic Region, meaning something that’s vaster than the cosmos. It’s an immense region of consciousness.





Conditions Experienced at the Seventh Chakra


Lifetimes can be spent exploring this region. It’s like stepping into a different dimension where one feels as if they are standing on the edge of a vast, limitless expanse of stillness, power, and beauty. In Heartfulness, the journey is such that one gets a rich experience of this region, especially its stillness and immensity.





Absolute Stillness and Infinite Movement: Consciousness at the Seventh Chakra


At the seventh chakra, one calms in the eye of the storm. Around you, there could be unpredictability, chaos, stress, and everything else that can disturb the inner peace, but you remain centered in stillness. There is a specific reason why this occurs. See, when you settle down at the seventh chakra, the stillness of the soul resonates with the stillness of the mind. It’s as though they click into place: This is the exact moment when you realize the existence of the higher entity within.

Once the resonance between the soul and mind is harmonized, nothing can shake the stillness of your mind. No matter what happens in the world around you, you are centered. You appreciate the immense beauty of the soul blooming within, and your stillness radiates in peace and moderation.

Stillness does not mean that you are stationary. Think about a wooden top that kids spin with twine or the fidget spinners they play with. When the top is spinning at a high speed, it looks stationary. Only when it begins to lose speed do you realize it’s moving. It’s exactly the same for your consciousness: It is moving so quickly that you seem still to the eyes of the Universe. This is the quality of consciousness at the seventh chakra: absolute stillness and infinite movement.

When one merges with this chakra, they become unshakable. Be it a subject to study, a business deal to close, things in the family to attend to, or working on behalf of nature’s commands, they can steady the mind in all these areas simultaneously. Even their agitation will have a stillness, indicating the enormous poise that reigns within. If you are in the company of someone in this condition, you imbibe that essence and benefit from it. You feel their peace and stillness in your heart.

Such a condition and many other higher conditions result from mastery of consciousness. The integrated development in the spiritual anatomy project brings you face-to-face with such conditions in a natural way. We don’t hanker for conditions or try hacks to access altered states of consciousness. We seek mastery that brings us to a level where states of consciousness descend on demand.





The Paracosmic Region: A Powerhouse


Besides stillness, power and expansion take on a new meaning at the seventh chakra. This chakra is the storehouse of inexhaustible energy, and power descends from here to the sixth chakra; from there, it is distributed to the lower regions. When you merge in this chakra, you feel all the lower chakras are also energized with power. It’s as if a bolt of lightning is discharged from the seventh chakra, which continues to support the expansion of lower chakras.

In some of your meditations while at the seventh chakra, you feel as if the field of your meditation is expanding from your heart and growing outward. When you come out of meditation, you have a distinct feeling of expansion within and without. Some also feel the expansion as ascension, where they soar to a higher level, riding waves of energy higher and higher. Consciousness becomes so liberated that you can sense it projected in all directions. Some sensitive practitioners feel that they are expanded all over, and the distance no longer feels like a barrier. To some, even the Universe seems small.





THE TRAPPINGS OF POWER: CURVATURE AND UNLEASHING DOMINANCE


This chakra is an ocean of power and ecstasy replete with curvatures. One may feel ecstatic when passing through this region. The feeling of ecstasy created by power is the sign of an ecstatic ego. The effects of such ecstasy are countered by the spiritual restlessness within, which helps one move onward. Additionally, if one can remain vigilant to such conditions, then the journey becomes faster.

Besides ecstasy, some may enjoy the charming effects of power and feel invincible. And upon whom do we unleash our so-called invincibility? Mostly our loved ones bear the brunt.

There once lived a sage named Durvasa in India during the Vedic times. He was notorious for his power and harshness. His every word would upset others to tears, and people froze around him. His life was a saga of unleashing fear and discomfort in others. Instead of receiving love and warmth from those around him, Durvasa created an aura of wrath and fear, estranging himself from what he most sought. I bring up this example to remind you that we are all on this path to become one with the Source. We are here to become love.

As we progress in our spiritual journey, it’s important that our etiquette, especially our words and actions, reflect the loving tenderness of the heart. The words we use can either serve as a bridge to connect with someone’s heart, or they can be like barbs that hurt the feelings of others. At the seventh chakra, it’s particularly important to counter any feelings of power or superiority with humility and kindness. This means being mindful of our words and speaking with compassion and respect.





Powers for Nature’s Work


At the seventh chakra, there are many powers that highly elevated yogis can harness to carry out nature’s work. The powers are of an order that can shake up galaxies and planetary systems. The seventh chakra is also home to the mightiest instrument of power, the Wheel of the Supreme (or the Maha-Kal-Chakra), which is utilized to cleanse the Universe of negative elements and restore order.

It’s important to note that these powers are not meant for pleasure, showboating, or dominating others. They are meant for the betterment of humanity and are used by evolved souls working under the orders of nature. Heartfulness is the path of love and not power. The system is designed such that practitioners are insulated from any powers along the way. Also, any effects of power that come our way are channeled into creating onward momentum for the journey.





ASK DAAJI


Daaji, I often hear about the mystical powers of the yogis, especially astral travel. Can you talk more about this?

Astral travel has been a popular subject in pop culture books and movies, including Star Wars: The Last Jedi, in which Luke Skywalker projects his avatar across the galaxy to confront Kylo Ren and his army. While these creative depictions are entertaining, astral travel is meant for spiritual work.

When you are at the seventh chakra, astral travel becomes a possibility. Astral travel enables a yogi to go wherever the work demands. The subtle body is sent to the area of work with the intention of completing the work and returning. The yogi can also send the subtle body to many locations at the same time. In the world outside, we travel from one place to another. In the inner world, the journey is such that you go nowhere and yet your presence is there where you will it.





Development of Intuitive Capacity


Intuition is inner guidance in the form of inspiration. These inspirations can come during meditation or when you are in a meditative state, or sometimes even in dreams. Simplicity, purity and selflessness create the conditions for intuition to arise.

The seventh chakra is the astral realm, and the intuitive capacity of the finest type starts developing from here. To help accelerate the inner transformation, the abhyasi gets inspirations about what to do, what not to do, how to act, what decision to make, what lifestyle to adopt, and so on. The astral realm gives indications and suggestions. They are like ideas filled with potential. It is for us to actualize them. We can either further develop it, delay it, or kill it. It’s up to us.

You can think of intuitive guidance like friendly advice from a caring elder. They come from a place of your well-being and growth. The more you adopt and implement and realize, Yes, this works, the more guidance flows toward you.





Aham Brahmasmi: I Am the Source


A feeling of inseparableness from the Absolute is felt as one journeys across chakras. This feeling grows finer and finer as one advances toward higher chakras. The inseparableness with the Absolute is felt on three levels.

At the lowest level, it appears in the form of feeling I am the Source—that is, there is no separation between me and the Source. Next, it turns into the feeling All is the Source, conveying a sense of universal inseparableness. Everything in creation has a connection with the Source. Last of all, it assumes the feeling All from the Source. This feeling conveys a sense of extinction of every view leading to a state of non-beingness. At each chakra, these three feelings are felt, but at the seventh chakra, the abhyasi’s mind harmonizes well with these feelings, and the condition is felt in the most vivid way.





Albert Einstein once said, “He who can no longer pause to wonder and stand rapt in awe, is as good as dead; his eyes are closed.” Our journey at the seventh chakra infuses us with stillness of a most refined quality. The stillness within gives birth to awe, igniting the journey of the next chakra.





SELF-REFLECTION


Have you had experiences of intuition when the chatter in your mind is silent?

How do you think your life might change the more you listen in silence to your heart?





22.


The Eighth Chakra: Surrender





Name Eighth Chakra

Prominent Element Fire

Color White

Location Three finger-widths above sixth chakra

Defining Quality Peace

Main Feelings Wonder, peace, surrender

Similar Vibrations Third chakra

Points Nearby Chit Lake, Passion, and Saraswati

Region Surrender, Prapanna



In the jagged wilderness of the Jalini Forest in the kingdom of Kosala, there lived a dacoit who killed travelers and collected their right-hand pinky fingers as souvenirs.23 He wove these fingers into a garland, which he wore around his neck. The morbid display of his kills earned him the name Angulimala, meaning “the one who wears a garland (mala) of fingers (anguli).” The legend goes that he had slain 999 people and was awaiting the one thousandth victim to complete his garland.

One fateful day as he prowled the forest for his next victim, he saw a monk strolling alone. By that point, everyone in the kingdom knew of the dacoit’s viciousness, and no one dared walk the forest alone. Yet here was a monk, enjoying his walk alone. Angulimala bolted to pin down the monk. But as he lunged for the monk, the monk seemed to float farther away.

After a few failed attempts, frustrated, he roared, “Monk! Stop now!”

The monk, none other than the Buddha, turned around, and his eyes met Angulimala’s. In those moments, the dacoit saw the unending depths of the Buddha’s eyes.

“I have stopped,” the Buddha whispered. “When will you stop?”

The Buddha’s kindness and loving sympathy dissolved Angulimala’s hate and rage. A mere glance and a few words transformed Angulimala. He fell at the feet of the Buddha and sought redemption. It is said that Angulimala became a disciple of Buddha and even composed scriptures.

What Angulimala experienced was awe. A profound moment where you come across something so surreal, majestic, and limitless that all your ideas, conditioning, and frameworks dissolve. In these moments of awe, the human spirit transforms.

Modern-day psychologists studying awe describe it as a spiritual, moral, and aesthetic emotion.24 The towering granite cliffs of Yosemite, the limitlessness of the Pacific Ocean, the moving beauty of a Vermeer, the profound depth of a meditation—such experiences fill you with awe. In such transcendent moments, you rejoice in your smallness. Toward the end of your journey in the Paracosmic Region (the seventh chakra), you begin to experience awe, which comes to its zenith in the eighth chakra. You witness a shift in your consciousness that creates quietude in your heart. Quietude is an attitude of enrapture where, in silence, you are drawn toward something far greater than you.

Such awe from spiritual experiences helps sublimate the ego. Overcoming the ego by forced subservience to a grander ideal is artificial, and it does not work. But when you experience something greater and feel your connection with it, the resulting awe helps you focus on that greater ideal. In this way, the ego shifts focus from I, me, and myself and looks up to thee, thou, and thine.





From Awe to Surrender


This shift in focus from the lower self (I) to the higher self (Thee) is the beginning of surrender. It’s a grand epoch in your consciousness and a worthy goal to strive for. I use the word surrender, but in the yogic tradition, the actual word is Saranagati, or Prapatti. It is a state of loving dependence and a reverential and joyful acceptance of all that comes your way in life. You can think of surrender as letting go of the limited self and its bondage.

From the eighth chakra on, your journey is one of letting go. To climb a ladder, you let go of the lower step so you can go higher. The trees let go of leaves to make way for new ones. The flowers let go of the seeds and, in turn, create meadows filled with blossoms. You, too, arrive at more sublime states of consciousness only because you have let go of previous ones.

Letting go means making decisions in favor of growth and implementing those decisions with love. As you evolve, you let go of all the baggage you are carrying. By baggage, I mean the emotional baggage of prejudices, anger, jealousy, guilt, likes and dislikes, and anything else that burdens the soul. Some baggage you let go of through the cleaning process. The rest, you hand over to the guru and you move onward. In the yatra, the guru takes over the baggage, provided you allow it. Surrender is nothing but handing over the baggage to the guru so you can travel light on the journey.

Prior to the eighth chakra, there was a lot of pushing and pulling to surrender. This is understandable, since the ego needs to latch on to something for its survival. But as you refine and sublimate the ego, the process of letting go unfolds naturally. Religions have used symbolism to indicate this idea: Lord Krishna surrounded by cows. The cows are content letting go of their worries of sustenance and survival. They know the cowherd who led them to the pasture will lead them back to the stable. Lord Jesus holding the lamb in his arms depicts a similar vision of a good shepherd, protecting the flock now settled in the caring embrace of God.

That becomes our state, too. Everything seems just as it should be. There is decreasing separation between the soul and the Source. Your single-minded attention is now set on the goal, the Center. So far, your devotion, your effort, and your strength moved you forward. But awe makes you realize, Why struggle when I am being lovingly carried? Awe leads to surrender, which leads you to wisdom.





Conditions Experienced at the Eighth Chakra


By the time you are at the eighth chakra, many noticeable changes occur. Some of the most important are:





Synchronicity Becomes Routine


Some of you may notice deeper synchronicity with your surroundings. You may be pondering a question, and the answer appears in the book you’re reading. You think of someone from the distant past, and they drop you a note. You wish something well for a family, and it happens. Such synchronicities have occurred before, too, but now they occur so often that you stop wondering about them. They become such a routine affair that you rely on them. You get into a rhythm of waiting for a hint or a sign, and sure enough, it shows up. It’s one of the ways that surrender expresses itself in your behavior. A lot more can be said about this topic, but it would be better to experience how synchronicity manifests in daily life and guides you.





Relationship with the Guru


I have observed that in Asian countries and other parts of the East, it is common for families to have a spiritual teacher. They may have a photo of the teacher in their household and follow their teachings. The main focus is on the teacher. On the other hand, in the West, there is a greater emphasis on the teaching itself, with the Western mind evaluating and assessing the teachings before focusing on the teacher. Despite these differences, the goal remains the same: spiritual growth.

In the Heartfulness Way, by the time you arrive at the eighth chakra, you may have spent years, possibly decades, with the practice. By now, the spiritual anatomy project becomes a top priority for you. You also develop an authentic curiosity about the guru.

Beyond the person and the physical presence, you are keen to comprehend the guru as a principle. This idea helps one think of the guru as a guiding energy or an inspiration. In that sense, the guru is not necessarily a specific person, but a concept or an idea that represents the highest potential of human consciousness. Such shift in thinking encourages aspirants to look within, to connect with their inner wisdom and cultivate a richer understanding of their place in the Universe. It leads to soulful inquiries like How do I deepen the heart-to-heart connection? How do I experience what the guru experienced? What is my real identity?





A Refined Flavor of Peace


In contrast to the seventh chakra, at the eighth chakra power loses its charm. One realizes the difference between power and the source of the power. With the greatness of the Source imprinted in one’s heart, it brings one to a special flavor of peace. Think of the freshness a person walking in the blazing sun would feel after a bath in the cool waters of a river. The flavor of peace at the eighth chakra rejuvenates you with its freshness.

All through the journey, you experience peace at regular intervals. After the journey at the first chakra, you enjoy peace when you land at the second. Similarly, tired from the aftermath of emotions at the third chakra, you feel refreshing peace when you enter the fourth, the water chakra. Now again, after the ecstasy of power of the seventh chakra, you hit a high pitch of peace at the eighth chakra. It’s as if nature designed the journey with pit stops. Besides rest and rejuvenation, is there any special reason why the journey is designed this way?

You see, the yogic traditions have a special name for inner peace, and it’s called atma shanti, where your atma (soul) finds peace. Such peace is an outcome of the soul’s confidence that the means chosen for the goal are proper. If they were not, you would not find atma shanti. So that’s why at regular intervals the soul conveys a message of peace, seeing the assurance of the path.

By the time you come to the eighth chakra, the peace has actualized. You can say that the soul is now at reasonable height from where it can see and be reassured, Yes, now I have made my way up. It’s an extraordinary condition to have.





The Matrix Moment: Renunciation Evolves


Do you remember the ending sequence in the movie The Matrix when Neo deciphers the green screen of flowing numbers? It’s when he unravels the Matrix and sees it for what it is. At the eighth chakra, something similar happens, but it’s even more exhilarating. (Sorry, Neo, the yogis got there long before you.)

When you access the eighth chakra, you develop an inner condition where the deeper meaning and purpose of life become clear. You comprehend the reason for likes and dislikes, the role of desires, the need for generosity, the value of sacrifice, the importance of humility, and many other concepts finally fall into place. You recognize their necessity, and this recognition refines renunciation (Vairagya).

So far, renunciation has grown at each level of your journey, becoming more refined as you move from one chakra to another. Renunciation is not the nonpossession of things but nonattachment to them, a loving detachment where you are involved but not ensnared. But the renunciation developed up to this point has a subtle aversion to the world. There is a feeling of avoidance.

At the eighth chakra, renunciation evolves into another state called self-withdrawal (Uparati in Sanskrit). In self-withdrawal, you are free of all desires, even those pertaining to the next world. Your mind is centered on the Absolute, and your senses are completely purified. You use them for the purposes they were meant for: eyes to see and not compare, tongue to speak with kindness and not gossip, ears to hear only that which is ennobling, and touch that connects and not repels.

In self-withdrawal, whatever work you do, there is a balance in all senses and faculties. You experience peace and settledness where activity does not cast the slightest impression on your mind. You feel as if the whole world is like a dream. Modern-day psychologists studying the flow state often described as a feeling of effortless concentration and enjoyment in what you are doing. Self-withdrawal is like a superlative flow state.

To allow self-withdrawal to mature, we all must cultivate moderation. Moderation means balance in all senses and faculties, nothing more or less than what is naturally required at the time for any specific purpose without its slightest impression on the mind. Moderation is a characteristic of nature and the essence of spirituality. Practicing gentle and polite language, courteous dealings with others, sympathy and love for fellow beings, reverence toward elders, and an unrevengeful nature is greatly helpful in allowing the state of self-withdrawal to settle in your being.





POINTS NEAR THE EIGHTH CHAKRA: CHIT LAKE, POINTS OF PASSION, AND KNOWLEDGE


There are three other points near the eighth chakra: Chit Lake, Points of Passion, and Knowledge. These points play a vital role in contributing to inner peace. I describe these points while we are at the eighth chakra because of their physical proximity; however, the work at these points has been occurring from the very start of your practice. The essential practices of Heartfulness meditation and sittings facilitate the work at these points—the flowering of which contributes to inner peace.

If you were to draw one-inch lines from the seventh and eighth chakras toward the inside of your head, forming a triangle, the meeting point of those lines is where you’ll find there three points: Chit Lake, Knowledge Point, and Passion Point, bunched together like grapes.





Chit Lake

The constant flow of thoughts that descends from the mind is generated by a chakra called chit lake. The word chit means “consciousness,” and Chit Lake conveys the source from which thoughts descend. The current, or thought flow, from the Chit Lake descends, passes through the fifth chakra, and divides into three branches—two of them flow toward the first chakra, and the third branch flows toward the second chakra.

During meditation, the Chit Lake gets cleaned, and as a result the flow from the Chit Lake is also clean. The excessive thoughts that bother us during meditation are also calmed as the Chit Lake is purified. In the early days of your practice, the perceived color of the Chit Lake is grayish. As you advance, you perceive a brilliant ruby red color at this chakra.


The Point of Knowledge and the Point of Passion

Near the Chit Lake are the twin Points of Knowledge and Passion. These two Points, which almost touch each other, are inseparable. If you work on one, the other is also worked on.

Knowledge Point is all about the knowledge you need. This point is very active in intellectuals, but don’t confuse the opening of the Knowledge Point with becoming all-knowing in one fell swoop. It is more that whatever knowledge is needed comes to you effortlessly. For example, any confusion you may feel in the early days of practice is replaced with the assurance that whatever knowledge is necessary will descend.

The Passion Point is all about stirring of passion. It’s likely that as you cross the eighth chakra, the passion you feel surpasses even what you may have felt during your teenage years as, out of nowhere, the mind is overwhelmed with sexual thoughts. (This can come as a distressing surprise to anyone who arrives at the eighth chakra in their old age; often, at some level we like to believe that passions have left us behind.)

Many people want to suppress their passion because they think it’s not conducive to spiritual growth. But by doing so, they will also suppress knowledge. When Knowledge Point is active, you activate Passion also. When you cut passion, you cut knowledge as well. So, forcefully repressing passion through thoughts is not advisable. A better way is to allow moderation to develop through regular practice and cultivating the right attitudes. Some advanced practices for Point A meditation and cleaning at Point B also help; you can learn these from a preceptor.



As you move forward from the eighth chakra, the state of surrender blossoms to create a new level of openness to life. Even without us being aware, we accept everything that comes our way without judgment. The eye is fixed on the goal, and the feeling of one’s insignificance as compared to the grandeur of the Source takes root in the heart.





SELF-REFLECTION


Can you recall an example of how you let go of a situation in life? What did that teach you about yourself?

Would a life not guided by seeing things as good and bad bring you comfort and peace?





23.


The Ninth Chakra: Insignificance





Name Ninth Chakra

Prominent Element Water

Color Gray

Location Four finger-widths from the tenth chakra, toward the forehead

Defining Quality Surrender and humility

Main Feelings Divinity all around

Similar Vibrations 4

Region Surrender and Absolute, Prapanna Prabhu



Once an emperor drew a line on the floor with a piece of chalk. Then, looking at his courtiers, he said, “I want you to shorten this line. But you can’t erase the line or break the floor.”

When no one could figure out how to shorten the line, the king’s favorite minister stepped in. He took a piece of chalk and drew a longer line right next to the one the king had drawn. In an instant, the line drawn by the king became shorter.

Drawing a new line changed the perspective. The sublimation of the ego is a similar exercise. If you try to annihilate the ego by force, it doesn’t work. But when you change your perspective and look up to something far grander and magnificent, then the heart is filled with appreciation. It longs to become one with the grander idea, and the ego supports this endeavor. Such a life-altering perspective occurs when you enter the ninth chakra. You enter a state where you feel you are born into a new world.

The ninth chakra is the region where the balance tips between you and the Source. Up to this point, our life was centered around I, and the higher self, the Thou, was in the periphery. At the ninth chakra, you are re-centered around Thou, and the I dissolves away even from the periphery. After a considerable ascent, rising above the clouds, for the first time in your spiritual anatomy project, you have a direct view of the Source. The feeling so near, and yet so far, which was a constant companion until now, is gone. Your heart knows that you are in the presence of the Absolute.

This experience leaves such a deep impact on you that an automatic meditative state develops in the heart. You may be running to catch a flight, mowing the lawn, cooking dinner, or even in the middle of an argument, but through all this, within you, the meditative state continues undisturbed. Constant remembrance, which until this point was a practice you cultivated, is now as automatic as breathing.

Radha, the spiritual companion of Lord Krishna, was thinking of Krishna and slipped into meditation. As she meditated, her heart called out Krishna. Krishna. Krishna.… After a time, the form of Radha changed into that of Krishna. And then, Krishna started thinking of Radha and called out, Radha. Radha. Radha.…

The story is not about Radha or Krishna. It’s about how in the journey you have come to a place where your call echoes in the Center. So far, you were seeking the Center, and now the Center seeks you.





Conditions Experienced at the Ninth Chakra


Extending the analogy of the small line and the big line, your heart now perceives the Source throughout as if every beat is a reminder of its presence. Wherever you look, you feel the radiance of the Source flowing. The birds, flowers, insects, plants, air, water, people—all are from the Source; this feeling is predominant. The heart overflows with feelings of tenderness, and such a tender heart bids farewell to all ill will and prejudice.

From the ninth chakra on, the ego sublimates into humility. The more you allow your heart to yield, the humbler and more loving you become. And is there any limit to how much the heart can yield? We come from infinity, we merge into infinity, and our capacity to love is infinite. The more the heart surrenders, the more love flows through you.

From this region onward, your conscience is clear like spring water, and your weaknesses appear more clearly to you. Any inclination of the ego to dominate others feels torturous. Even the slightest wrong thoughts create whiplash within, and instantly you repent by correcting your thoughts and praying for forgiveness.





The State of Insignificance


Recall the story I shared while writing about the heart chakras, where Babuji complimented my inner condition. My condition in those days was like a dog relaxing in the shade of a tree on a blazing hot afternoon. Babuji read my state and said, “You should be in this condition 24/7.” It was the condition of insignificance (abhoodhiyat, or subdued state). When you merge in the ninth chakra, you arrive at that condition of insignificance. In this state one doesn’t care about things like respect, disrespect, and so on. One is centered in Thou, and that’s where the attention rests.i

There is a certain forgetfulness that accompanies this state, where you become less mindful of your abilities. Don’t be alarmed. You didn’t lose them. Instead you lose the burden of proving to yourself and others how good you are. Your skills become high-performance tools at your disposal. You use them when needed and then put them away.





Freedom from the Choice-Busy Mind


We often underestimate how overwhelming choice can be. Consider these choices we make every day: what to do, how to spend money, whom to spend time with, what to eat, when to get up, when to go to sleep, what to wear, and so on. According to a study by Cornell University researchers, our brains churn through 226.7 decisions a day, just about food alone!25 Not to mention significant life choices like where to live, whom to marry, what to study, which career to pursue, and so on.

The weight of constant decision-making and personal preferences often meld into a potent cocktail of FOMO (fear of missing out) for many individuals. Even before they make a choice, regret sets in for the choice they won’t be making. They keep brooding over the decisions they did not make and spoil the good thing they may have going.

At the ninth chakra, you are freed from the cognitive and emotional burden that comes from thinking and choosing. A choice-free mind intuitively guides you to cut through the clutter. You don’t have to think for long; the answer is readily felt in your heart. This heart-based decision-making is a shift in behavior from thinking to feeling, and you can experience this shift yourself. You don’t have to wait until you reach the ninth chakra. The shift from thinking to feeling begins much earlier, where your heart becomes more vocal and guides you in decision-making by inspiring you and alerting you when you may be steering off course.

At the ninth chakra, heart-based decision-making becomes the norm. You have an innate ability to face circumstances with courage, respect, and reverence (dheerata) because the heart-mind field is in resonance. Your intentions, thoughts, and choices are aligned with your evolution. The energy of desire is transformed into energy for evolution. There is clarity in thinking, humanity in execution, and contentment in the results that follow.





The Guru and Abhyasi Relationship Hits a High Note


By the time you arrive at the ninth chakra, your relationship with the guru has matured to a level of mutual trust and adoration. As an abhyasi, you are grateful to the teacher for the conditions and the experiences that helped you progress. Your heart appreciates what you have achieved, and that appreciation cultivates trust. This trust solidifies into faith: Yes, here is someone who can help me reach my goal. In your heart, when you feel this faith irrevocably, then the heart-to-heart connection becomes permanent.

Arriving at this level of heart-to-heart connection is extremely special. Not everyone reaches this level, not because the guru doesn’t want you to or because nature is filtering people out. Rather, achieving spiritual or worldly goals hinges on aligning priorities with one’s goals. When your goals and priorities are aligned, then you progress fast, and if they diverge, progress slows. If your goal is to achieve peak fitness, then exercise should be a top priority. If you want financial freedom, then creating wealth should be a top priority. If you want to achieve the Absolute, then practice with the right attitude must be a top priority.

An aspirant whose goals and priorities merge forges a unique connection with the guru. The sincerity, discipline, and eagerness of the aspirant to reach the goal move the guru’s heart. At this stage, the aspirant can be called a disciple in a nod to the self-discipline that has developed. The guru ensures that the heart-to-heart connection they share becomes permanent.

Like a mother carrying a child in her womb, the guru at this stage of the journey ensconces the remembrance of the disciple in their mental womb for seven months. The togetherness of thought during seven months allows the guru to create a spiritual entity of the disciple. At the end of this period, the guru delivers the spiritual entity of the disciple into a higher dimension of existence.

Think for a moment about backing up your hard drive to the cloud, where the backup is an exact replica of your hard drive. You can think of a spiritual entity in similar terms—a replica of the soul—although, unlike clicking a button to back up your drive, it’s not a simple achievement at all. The soul replication is a great spiritual milestone, which the guru eagerly awaits all to arrive at.

The condition of insignificance makes all this possible. It’s not a comparative state where one thinks of themselves as insignificant by beating down one’s ego. The inner softness of the heart is such that the idea of any form of comparison is lost. Such a soul grows in potency because of the inner pliability. In chapter 2, I gave the example of a block of ice, water, and water vapor. Between the three, it’s water vapor, the subtlest, that has the maximum potential to expand. Likewise, a soul at the ninth chakra has such a level of subtlety that it can grow further by replication.





Soul Replication Explained


To understand the idea of soul replication, think about the life force and how it divides and grows. There are plants such as rose, lavender, and banyan, from which you can cut a small branch and plant it in the soil, and in a few days it takes root. Other plants, like the acacia, disperse seeds that carry the life force. So, depending on the level of consciousness, the life force propagates in different ways.

In the case of human beings, physical birth aside, there is the possibility of spiritual birth within a person’s lifetime. Soul replication is the mechanism for achieving spiritual birth. Souls that achieve a certain level of potency can replicate. For souls with lower potency, replication is not possible. But higher-potency souls give birth to what we can call the spiritual entity, a replica of your soul. It has the same level of potency as your soul does.

The spiritual entity takes birth in a dimension that can support the vibratory lightness that it needs. Under the watchful guidance of the guru, the spiritual entity is born in a dimension of consciousness corresponding to the ninth chakra. In this dimension, the spiritual entity is welcomed by the hierarchy of spiritual guides who receive it with warmth and care.

The spiritual entity is at home here, but it gets its nourishment through you. The actions that you take here in this world affect its growth. It’s as if an umbilical cord is connecting you and your spiritual entity. When you meditate, the enriching vibrations travel to your spiritual entity and help it grow. When you are drowned in constant remembrance, the spiritual energy that charges you also enriches your spiritual entity. When you develop simplicity and purity, the spiritual entity feels the lightness you exude. A life of acceptance, generosity, and sacrifice helps you here in this life, and it also helps you in the beyond by enriching your spiritual entity.

While nurturing is possible, so is neglect.

If one ends up falling victim to prejudice, hatred, and other negative traits while being stationed at the ninth chakra or the higher chakras, then the spiritual entity also suffers. What height one falls from decides how much it hurts. If we slip while walking on the road, we might get away with a bruise or a sprain. But the consequences can be catastrophic if one falls from a great height.

Similarly, if the inner compass gets misdirected while you are in the higher regions, the spiritual entity shrivels. It quivers with the pain inflicted by heavier vibrations and is tormented in the other dimension. In some extreme cases, the spiritual entity can even wither away. This is a spiritual tragedy.

Does this mean we keep worrying about mistakes we might make? Living in fear of making mistakes that might cause downfall is not a positive way to approach the goal. Also, if we keep worrying about mistakes, we will make one sooner or later. We should remind ourselves of what brought us here. It’s our devotion. Loving devotion to the goal made our ascent possible. We take refuge in devotion and allow that force to continue propelling our progress.

We must be mindful of the banks that allow the river of devotion to flow serenely. Those banks are humility and purity. The famous line that Clint Eastwood’s character, Dirty Harry, speaks in the movie Magnum Force, “A man’s got to know his limitations,” rings true here. Humility and purity create awareness of limits. The heart is sensitized, and any slight indication of older conditioning kicking in triggers warning signs in your heart. Thoughts like Is this the right way to think? How should I amend my actions? Am I conducting myself with the right softness of heart? and How will my family or my guru feel about such actions? help you to course-correct.

The spiritual entity’s primary role is to enhance the potency of your soul. Instead of one working alone, you now have a force multiplier. There are two of you working in tandem and growing faster.

One more thing to remember: Even if it is billions of years away, at the time of the final dissolution of the Universe, when everything in creation will merge back into the Center, the evolved souls with spiritual entities will affect the level of consciousness of the next creation.





ASK DAAJI


What happens to my soul after I die?

At the time of death, your soul ascends to a dimension that resonates with the vibration of your soul. There are infinite dimensions, so the soul will always find its exact vibratory match. It’s a perfect fit like a lock and key.

If the consciousness has evolved beyond the fifth chakra, then the soul attains liberation. For such a soul, there is no rebirth (unless it chooses to take birth). The journey of a liberated soul is guided by the spirit guides in those dimensions. If the soul does not attain liberation, then depending on its karma, the soul enjoys a period of salvation and then takes birth.

At each dimension there are spirit guides. Some spirit guides travel back and forth, visiting many dimensions. But there is always a designated spirit guide or a team of spirit guides to look after our spiritual progress. There, too, a spirit guide who is fixed at a certain dimension has no liberty to move up. But there are spirit guides who can go to any dimension, up or down. The spirit guides who have the freedom to travel across dimensions are highly elevated ones.



The journey at the ninth chakra shows how insignificance helps us rise to great heights of consciousness. It shows the beauty of nature’s design where the humbler we become the higher we rise, and the lighter our ego becomes, the grander the states of consciousness that descend into our heart.





SELF-REFLECTION


Have you experienced a feeling of overwhelm brought on by too many choices? How did you overcome this feeling?

What are your thoughts at this point about the importance of humility in order for you to grow further spiritually?





Footnote


i In Indian mythology, Hanumaan was a devotee of Lord Rama. He exemplifies the state of insignificance. Hanu means “without” and maan means “respect.” Hanumaan means “one who doesn’t care for one’s own maan or apmaan (respect or disrepect).” One’s attention is fully centered in the ideal taken up for devotion.





24.


The Tenth Chakra: Belongingness





Name Tenth Chakra

Prominent Element Air

Color Medium green

Location Two finger-widths from the crown chakra toward the forehead

Defining Quality Belongingness

Main Feelings Oneness with the Absolute

Similar Vibrations 5

Region Absolute, Prabhu



A sensei was walking on the monastery grounds, preoccupied with thoughts about finding his successor. As he walked around, he inspected a wall that was being constructed around the monastery. He saw one of the monks who had been in the monastery for a long time, working on a section of the wall. He asked the monk what he was doing.

The monk politely replied, “Laying bricks, Master.”

The sensei continued his walk and saw one more monk working on another section of the wall, and he asked him the same question.

“Building a wall to protect the monastery,” replied the monk.

Toward the end of his walk, the master saw a young monk whistling away and laying bricks. The lightness and joy of the young monk touched the master. The young monk was new to the monastery, and he had never seen the master before. The master approached him and asked, “Young man, what are you doing?”

“I am building a part of my master’s vision. I am laying bricks, but it’s the beginning of something exquisite. You will see, sir, in the coming years this monastery will grow into a beacon of light.”

A sense of belongingness made the young monk one with the sensei’s vision. Such belongingness comes when hearts beat as one for a higher purpose. It reflects the deep spiritual connection that unites all beings, where the vision of one is the vision of all.

Such a condition begins to emerge when one enters the tenth chakra. The entry into the tenth chakra marks the beginning of your journey in the Region of the Absolute, also called the First Mind, or the Godly Region. This is a vast region that spans the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth chakras. Entry into the Region of the Absolute marks a high point in the journey, where one has transcended human and humane levels and now swims in the divine realms to go toward the Source.





Conditions Experienced at the Tenth Chakra


At the ninth chakra, there were two entities: you and the Source. Your prayerful calls from the ninth chakra echoed in the Source. Up to that moment, you were seeking the Source, and at the ninth chakra, the Source seeks you. That game of the seeker and the sought that started at the ninth chakra is now in full swing at the tenth chakra. And, as the name of the region suggests, by the time your journey through this region ends, only one entity remains: the Absolute. You have succeeded in sublimating your ego by the time your journey in the Mind Region ends.





Belongingness


The intimacy with which the Absolute becomes everything and one’s ego sublimates totally is something to behold. This is not a conquest of dominance and authority. It’s a story of melting away in love. While at the ninth chakra, you had a view of the Source; once you enter the tenth chakra, you feel the proximity to the Source. The proximity makes you feel I and the Absolute are now one. There is no difference between us. Everything that is of the Absolute is also mine.

When this sense of “mine-ness” grows, it spills over into all aspects of life. At work, home, in the community, anywhere you may be, the openness of your heart and your very presence inspires others. The usual motivations like more money, more power, better visibility, and so on are all superseded when belongingness takes center stage.

Think of this example: A storm is coming. A window in your home is broken. The glass is shattered, and you don’t have money to fix it. What would you do? Likely, you would borrow money, call in a favor, or get creative with some other materials to fix the window. Whatever it takes, you would fix the window. Why? Because you have the sense that you must take care of your family. The sense of belonging creates the urgency to care, to protect, to nurture, to nourish, and, most important of all, to love.





Reverence for the Self


In such a state, the reverence for the Absolute is the reverence for the self. Why? Because the Absolute is in you, and you realize this irrefutably. The space outside and the space inside were an illusion created by the walls of ego. When the walls are taken down, the outside and inside become one. As the ego dissolves, you feel the oneness all around and within you.

The metaphorical separation between you and the Absolute has disappeared. You see the world through the eyes of the Absolute. When you speak, you feel it’s the Absolute speaking through you. In the past, to enjoy the fragrance of roses, you walked all the way to the garden. Now the scent of roses is always with you.

For this reason, you treat the body as a sacred place. You take care of the body as the abode of the Absolute. You refrain from any acts that would diminish the sanctity of your body, mind, and soul, aware of the communion you now have with the Absolute.





Sameness


Belongingness matures into sameness. There is an old wives’ tale that couples who age together start resembling each other. While that tale, like many others, is debatable, what isn’t debatable is that by the time you arrive at the tenth chakra, you have spent years loving, revering, thinking, feeling, and becoming like the Absolute. The purity and simplicity of your heart, the humility of ego, and the fervent song of prayer have all created a likeness between you and the Absolute. After all, what is the Absolute? It is you in the purest, simplest state.

Starting at the tenth chakra, sameness develops, and it continues as you go onward in this region. The idea of a creator and the creation starts to lose its hold on you in this chakra because you don’t see that separation as vividly anymore. Your gaze shifts higher, and you are looking at the horizon toward the origins of the First Mind.





ESCAPING THE TRAP OF BLISS: THE CROWN CHAKRA





Toward the end of the journey at the tenth chakra one comes face-to-face with the SDK (crown chakra, Sahasra Dal Kamal, Sahasrara). Located between the tenth and the eleventh chakras, SDK is the chakra for bliss. Yogic literature makes a big to-do about this chakra, and it is commonly regarded as the ultimate state. It’s understandable: After all, who doesn’t want bliss?

Yet, if you recall, at various parts of the journey, chakras can cast curvatures of consciousness. These are labyrinths in which consciousness gets trapped, and the journey stalls. The curvatures can appear in various forms. At the second chakra, it was peace. At the seventh chakra, it was power and ecstasy, and between the tenth and eleventh chakras, the SDK can trap you with bliss.

What we are seeking is merger with the Center, the highest approach available to us. Bliss at the SDK is like a scenic overlook on the freeway and not the destination. Also, when there is bliss, who is enjoying it? You are the one enjoying it, which means the ego is still there, and the goal is far away.

The elders offered us a coded word to remind us that the real goal is far beyond bliss. The coded word is sat-chit-anand, existence, consciousness, bliss. Sat-chit-anand is a mantra or a coded word for humanity to map our trajectory from human, to humane, to divine and beyond. It is a sacred formula: “Our existence (sat) can become worthwhile, enjoyable, successful, and purposeful (anand) only if our consciousness (chit) is allowed to evolve. When this happens, then we will experience real bliss.”

In the Heartfulness journey, while we move to the eleventh chakra, we do feel some effects of the SDK. If you are wearing white, no matter how fast you run through a coal mine, you will gather coal dust. It’s inevitable. Similarly, the SDK is the powerhouse of bliss, and some of the bliss rubs off on you. You enjoy this bliss as a restful supplement. And you need it for what comes next at the eleventh chakra.





SELF-REFLECTION


Can you recall examples of paying careful attention to the thoughts arising in your mind because you realize the impact of your thoughts and intentions on others?

What do you imagine it might feel like if you see yourself as part of everything in the Universe? How might that awareness expand your consciousness?





25.


The Eleventh Chakra: Restlessness





Name Eleventh Chakra

Prominent Element Earth

Color Pale yellow

Location Two finger-widths from the crown chakra toward the back

Defining Quality Vision of reality

Main Feelings Helplessness, restlessness

Region Absolute, Prabhu

Similar Vibrations 1 and 6



As you begin this chapter, I invite you to meditate for a few minutes on the meaning of these two words: life and existence. If you have a journal handy, write a sentence or two about the meaning of each word. If it’s easier, write down your responses on this page itself and mark the date, so when you revisit, you can see how your answers change over time.

Describing experiences is a tricky affair. It’s like describing a rainbow. Anyone who has seen a rainbow can attest to its beauty and grandeur. But to put it into words is a challenge. Regular journaling helps you to develop the vocabulary to put into words what is felt in the depth of the heart.

In my understanding, existence is eternal. When existence becomes encapsulated in a body, it becomes life. Your life has a beginning and an end. But existence is a continuum. Your body has a life, and your soul has an existence. A hint that you have completed the journey at the tenth chakra is the realization that there is an eternal, universal existence. In your heart, you feel the universal existence and feel its flow from the Center. Whatever shapes, forms, and colors life may take, they all flow in the continuum of existence.

While lives can be many, existence is but one. You knew of this before, but at the tenth chakra, you have the conviction of your experience. You know that you are eternity itself. When this feeling matures, then you are ready to plunge into the eleventh chakra.

The experience of universal existence gives you a vision of the Source from which everything, including you, sprang forth. Home is in sight, the feeling similar to taking the exit for your hometown after a daylong road trip: You’re so close you can taste it. With the anticipation of that final step—becoming one with the Absolute—whatever peace and bliss propelled you to this moment evaporates, and you become restless with yearning.

You are now in the wellspring of restlessness. And thankfully so. Restlessness is your best vehicle for growth. Think about it: At each stage, restlessness for the next stop helped you make progress. When you got to that next stop, the result was peace. Thereafter, restlessness kicked in again to propel you further.

Unrelenting restlessness and a sense of urgency is essential for success in material or spiritual realms. In a span of two years, a young Isaac Newton created calculus and offered some foundational ideas about gravitation, and in his quest to understand light and lenses, he even ended up sticking a needle in his eye. Many years later, when someone asked him how he worked out gravity, Newton replied, “By thinking continually.”26 Edison, a prolific inventor talking about his light bulb invention, said, “I have not failed. I’ve just found ten thousand ways that won’t work.”

Likewise in the spiritual realm, there are so many examples of unrelenting restlessness that led to human flowering. One day, a disciple asked Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, a great saint, why he was so restless in his devotion. Ramakrishna replied, “The restlessness is like a fish swimming in the ocean of devotion. Without restlessness, the fish would become stagnant and die. Similarly, without restlessness, the devotee’s spiritual progress would come to a standstill.”

In our journey, restlessness is the forerunner, and the condition we experience from all this restlessness is pain. Not intolerable pain, but growing pains akin to the pain of a butterfly breaking free from the shackles of the cocoon. It is pain that makes you a new you. Science shows this, too: When people are afflicted by pain and trauma, those with a strong spiritual core emerge resilient. They use the pain to create a new version of themselves.27

But remember, we don’t go around seeking restlessness and pain. The Heartfulness Way is the natural way. Whatever comes, we take it and use it for progress. Also important to understand is that the restlessness I am describing here is spiritual restlessness. Unlike the restlessness triggered because of an ailment or some other inconvenience, spiritual restlessness thrives as an undercurrent in the heart inspiring you to keep moving. There is great joy and fervor in this silent undercurrent that keeps propelling you onward.

At the tenth chakra, the restlessness and pain trigger a condition that can be described as “nonpeace peace.” Try to imagine a lump of salt without saltiness. It looks the part, feels the part, but its key essence—its saltiness—isn’t there. Something similar happens with peace at the eleventh chakra. It feels like peace, but there is no peacefulness there, only the agitation to move. Enveloped in this most beautiful restlessness, you continue to progress in the Region of the Absolute.





SELF-REFLECTION


Does your restlessness for spiritual growth make it easier for you to accept daily challenges at work and in the family? Do you have an example of a recent challenge that you cheerfully accepted?

What is the greatest lesson you have learned from something that you have repeatedly struggled with in your life? Has this lesson inspired you to embrace your human foibles with humility?





26.


The Twelfth Chakra: Settledness





Name Twelfth Chakra

Prominent Element Space

Color Pale pink

Location Four finger-widths from the eleventh chakra, toward the back

Marquee Quality Total settledness

Main Feelings Complete humility and settledness

Points Nearby Satyapad, Brahmarandhra

Similar Vibrations 2 and 7

Region Absolute, Prabhu



The merging of rivers is an evocative metaphor used in spiritual stories and traditions to represent the union of the soul with the Source. When two or more rivers merge, they create a force that is greater than the sum of its parts. In Hindu mythology, the convergence of the Ganges, Yamuna, and Saraswati Rivers symbolizes the merging of individual consciousness with universal consciousness. Similarly, the merging of the Missouri River and the Mississippi River in Native American traditions represents the transformative power of unity and the importance of working together toward a common goal.

As you imagine shifting from the eleventh to the twelfth chakra, I want you to envision the energy flow from chakra as a river. There are rivers of acceptance, peace, love, courage, and many more, all flowing toward the ocean, the Source. Some rivers might have started as a trickle, but as you progress, the rivers swell in their flow. The twelfth chakra is the grand junction, where everything you’ve accrued so far in the journey merges into one majestic river gushing toward the Center. You may recall the four stages of the flowering of a chakra: coexistence, nearness, identicality, and merger. The twelfth chakra mirrors this process at the macro level, as the states from every previous chakra unite to create identicality with the Source.

This is an important aspect to understand. When one embarks on the spiritual anatomy project, it is the first stage of the journey: coexistence. In this first stage, one has a vague understanding of something called the Center, and the journey begins. As one progresses and gains new experiences, the idea starts taking shape that there is something higher, a greater presence toward which one is progressing. This feeling becomes stronger as the ego sublimates, and one feels proximity to the Source. This is the second stage: nearness.

Upon further progress, at the twelfth chakra, one arrives at the third stage: identicality. Consciousness is now akin to the new level one arrives at. Lightness in the heart makes the weight of all mental activity lighter. One’s thoughts seem lighter, and all interactions have lightness. One feels settled in this stage. The resonance that kept developing with the Center is now complete, and one is akin to the Source. This is the stage where one is at the pinnacle of purity.





Pinnacle of Purity


At the twelfth chakra, one is purity personified. Purity is the absence of any contradiction. In such a state, thought loses its weight, there is no heaviness of emotions, and there is unity in one’s being. One arrives at sameness with the Absolute through the purification of all the chakras and cultivating a lifestyle that nurtures inner hygiene. This includes cleaning the samskaras and correcting the workings of the mind to develop correct thinking, the right understanding, and an honest approach to life. The discernment one develops helps preserve and nurture the purity within.

We originated from purity. The pure streams that caused our being also originated from the purest source, and for that reason, the thought of purity persisted in us through the passage of time. Establishing a relationship of devotion with the Source, the inner zeal of interest, and the guru’s guidance help one arrive at this rarefied place of purity.

And in this lap of purity, one rests.

At this stage, the ego is sublimated, and all that is left of it is the finest membrane of identity. Desires bid farewell a long time ago. At the twelfth chakra, the desire to progress spiritually also ends. You are in perfect contentment, where you want nothing and need nothing. And why should you? You are safe in the lap of the Absolute.

Perhaps, though, you already see the problem. Though we have reached the Absolute and identify with it completely, we are not yet one. We have not merged and, so, there is a standoff. You are perfectly content, at peace in the Region of Absolute and lacking motivation to move further, yet the Source is still awaiting you. How are we to resolve this standoff?

To add to the complexity of this situation, the twelfth chakra is also where the Brahmarandhra, through which the soul enters the body, is located. At the moment of conception, the soul arrives and stays close to the expectant mother. The soul circles around the expectant mother’s stomach; staying outside, the soul gives momentum to the cellular process for fetal development. This process happens in the first trimester of pregnancy. It accelerates the division of the cells, and the first organ that forms in the fetus is the heart. From the heart, the other organs are nourished. Once the fetus’s Brahmarandhra is well developed, the soul enters the body. At the time of death, the souls of liberated beings exit the body through the Brahmarandhra. If one has not arrived at the level of liberation, then the soul may leave the body through any of the orifices like the behind, eyes, ears, mouth, or nose.

When you are at the twelfth chakra, the natural urge for the soul will be to leave the body. (Don’t worry; no one is dying.) This is where the guru takes over. Like the mother kangaroo carries her joey, the guru carries the abhyasi to the Central Region, the thirteenth chakra. In one of the many innovations in the Heartfulness Way, the guru guides the abhyasi’s consciousness beyond the Brahmarandhra and facilitates its entry into the Central Region. This marks one’s entry into hallowed grounds of the Center. So much awaits the abhyasi there, in what is the largest region of all.





Nature’s Gate: Satyapad


Before the guru can take you from the Region of the Absolute to the Central Region, there is a gate that one needs to pass through. This gate is called the Path of Truth (Satyapad). Only those whose I, me, and myself have transformed into thee, thou, and thine can pass through the Path of Truth. It’s the litmus test of whether anything in one’s character might prevent their plunge into the Center. Most of all, it’s a check to ensure the ego is entirely sublimated into humility. This is not a judgment of your inherent worthiness—you are and always were one with the Center—but rather a vital support to ensure you are ready for the voyage ahead into the immensity of the Central Region.

Here are some hints to give you an idea of the people who cross the Path of Truth. People who are at this level no longer love. Their love is not a verb anymore. They become love. They are no longer humble; humility is their real nature. Their hearts are filled with childlike innocence.

Such people are like candles that gently illuminate everything around them and are consumed in the process. To you, their actions may seem like a sacrifice, but to them, it is just how they are. Such people have achieved what they needed to achieve in their lives. Their inner transformation is complete. Love is their only discipline. Like the sun that shines for one and all, like the flower that releases its fragrance for the breeze to carry, such individuals embody love. In the company of such people, we forget our worries and are lifted into a state of bliss. The Path of Truth is wide-open for such a heart, and the guru joyfully carries such a beautiful flower into the celestial golden fields.





SELF-REFLECTION


Can you relate to the experience of settledness and surrender? How might you describe the situation in your spiritual journal?

Can you imagine what it might feel like to be settled within to the extent that there is no conscious awareness of separation from others?





PART 8





THE CENTRAL REGION





27.


Entry into the Central Region


So far in the yatra, every experience you’ve had led to gaining knowledge. When someone says, “I know how to drive a car,” it means that person has experience driving it. Our experience accumulates to become knowledge. The experiences in the Heart and Mind Regions helped you gain knowledge of those regions. When you arrive at the Central Region, the ego is sublimated, so the notion of experiencing in the traditional sense disappears. When you and thou become one, there is only unity of being. In that sense, the experiencer and the experience have almost become one. Do you see the conundrum? Over time when one reaches this stage, the conundrum resolves itself in the depths of one’s being.

The finest type of superconsciousness pervades the Central Region, but that is not our goal, either. Much in the way children play with dolls or a doctor’s kit, a yogi plays with consciousness. What we have access to is only a symbol of what we hope to obtain. What we seek is the potentiality that is the cause for consciousness and then going beyond it toward ultimate Reality. By ultimate Reality, I refer to the original condition of nothingness. It is such a light state that even purity, simplicity, and peace seem dense and heavy in comparison. It is beyond the reach of senses and perception.

Our swim in the Central Region is the most expansive of all the regions.

To give you an idea of its immensity, Babuji has written that the first seer who entered the Central Region after creation is still swimming toward the Center and has made it halfway. In yogic literature, especially the Upanishads, there are a few mentions of the Center (referred to as Bhūmā). For example, the Chandogya Upanishad has this verse: “In which one sees nothing else, hears nothing else, understands nothing else, that is Bhūmā. But that in which one sees something else, hears something else, understand something else is finite. That which is Bhūmā (infinite) alone is immortal, and that which is finite is mortal.”28

Upon entering the Central Region, the first thing that one experiences are the feelings of universal existence. As one proceeds, one swims through rings of splendor, seven of them. During the swim through these, one goes through various conditions. After all this, one reaches the ocean of infinity, from where the swim to the Center, the thirteenth chakra, begins.





Entering the Central Region


To enable entry into the Central Region, the guru must create the necessary momentum in one’s consciousness. The guru gives special meditation sittings over two to three days to develop momentum in the abhyasi. During these sessions, the entire journey up to the twelfth chakra is repeated a couple of times. Every chakra undergoes all the four flowering stages in these two to three days. Repeating the journey through all the chakras is like swinging the sling a few times in the air to create momentum launching the rock. Such intense work rattles the state of contentment and enlivens the restlessness within to become one with the Center. When enough momentum has been created, one crosses the Path of Truth and arcing their way into the Central Region, and the final march begins.

There is an important aspect to observe about one’s movement from one chakra to another. In the Heart Region, one moves from a lower chakra to a higher one, as though pushed from one chakra to another. When one enters the Mind Region, movement changes to expansion. One doesn’t get pushed; instead, the higher chakra pulls one up. For example, we don’t move from the seventh chakra to the eighth chakra. The eighth chakra attracts you like a magnet, and in this way expansion continues. Noticing the pushes and pulls is helpful in deepening one’s sensitivity.

Regarding the entry to the Central Region, there is a technicality that you may find interesting. When one is at the twelfth chakra, the entry into the Central Region is not a straight entry. The Path of Truth is like a curved window, and one is arced into it, like a soccer ball arcs when it’s hit from the corner post and curves into the goal. And with this arc, one enters the Central Region and the final march begins.





If you think the Center is far out of reach and wonder if you need to know all this, you do. You belong there. It is the rightful place, and your real inheritance awaits you. We are passing through a special moment in time where Mother Nature has opened a window to offer us a quantum leap in this very life into the Center. The way is open, the method is available, the means are simple, and the field is prepared. What it takes is a heart that wants it all—and you are one of them, even if you don’t realize it now. The impulse that drives you within will keep you moving forward. So, cast aside any skepticism you have about not making it. Persevere with enthusiasm, and you will not regret it.





28.


The Thirteenth Chakra: Nothingness





Name Thirteenth Chakra

Prominent Element Space

Color Gray

Location Four finger-widths down from the twelfth chakra

Marquee Quality Omnipresence, omniscience, omnipotence

Main Feelings Oneness

Region Center, Bhooma



Entering the Central Region marks the apex of the journey from matter to energy to Absolute. At the time of creation, absolute vibration from the Center gushed out and transformed into energy that further transformed into matter. When you reach the Central Region, your consciousness has evolved from the material level to subtler levels, reestablishing resonance with the Center.

By the time one arrives at this stage, every cell of the body has been purified. All complexities and emotional baggage have been purged from the system, and one is at the highest pitch of purity. Such a transformation results from the unwavering, diligent, devoted commitment to self-transformation.

Up to this point in the yatra, there had always been a polarity that had to be resolved. In the Heart Region, the play of polarity was with emotions: contentment-discontentment, calmness-disturbance, compassion-displeasure, courage-discouragement, and clarity-delusion. In the Mind Region, the polarity was distilled to the soul versus the Source, the lower and higher selves. When one enters the Central Region, the play of polarity ceases. This is the realm of nothingness.

Words fall woefully short of the experience of nothingness. Most descriptions of the Center are limited and use metaphors or negation-based language. However, the description I want to share is more like a travelogue, providing details on the weather and winds of the realm of nothingness. Babuji conducted extensive spiritual research on the Central Region. In this effort, he was guided mainly by Lalaji, and the hierarchy of elevated souls also supported Babuji. Using this body of research and my own experiences, I hope to offer a glimpse into this extraordinary realm.

I pray that someday, you will know it for yourself.





Stages of Ego and the Central Region


By the time you enter the Central Region, your humility and purity create a condition within you where you become like a newborn child, with total innocence. This sentiment is expressed in the Bible: “Truly I tell you, unless you change and become like little children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.” Like the mother’s love protects and cares for the child, in the same way you are now embraced by the Source. Such intimacy between the soul and the Source is because of the dissolution of separateness. As the ego is sublimated, the sense of separateness dissolves. Understanding the stages in which the ego sublimates can help one assess where they are in their spiritual journey.

The idea of egoism originates from our identification with the physical body. When we attribute the body’s actions to ourselves, our consciousness becomes fixated on the body. Thoughts such as It’s my hard work that made this project successful, My creativity produced this work, and I am the best at this task are examples where we perceive the body to be the doer. This is the condition of ego for most people at the beginning.

As we enter into the Mind Region, our perspective shifts from identifying the body as the doer to recognizing something inward or finer. This marks the second stage of egoism. Depending on their beliefs, different people attribute this agency to various entities such as the soul, mind, God, guru, or some higher power. At this stage, the body is no longer considered the sole doer. One attributes their success to the guidance of elders and recognizes a higher power guiding them in their achievements. These feelings reflect the second stage of egoism, where the body’s role as the doer is transcended.

As we advance, we reach the third stage of egoism. At this stage, we understand that the work is not being done through the agency of the body or something inward, as felt in the first and second stages. Now, we are on the right path. Neither the body nor the mind is the doer, and we do not feel any other agency doing the work. The work is done automatically, in whatever way it is meant to be. We no longer ponder over questions like: How? By whom? Or through what agency?

As we progress further, we enter the Region of the Absolute, near the tenth chakra. Here, we no longer even feel the work being done. We do not feel it before or after; we know only that it continues automatically as needs demand. Imagine you are sleeping, and a mosquito bites you. You feel an itching sensation, your hand moves to the affected area, and you scratch it, all while remaining asleep. You have no conscious awareness of feeling the itch, and you do not remember anything about it when you wake up. This is the condition of automatic working, where you do everything circumstances demand, but the actions leave no impression on you. In other words, you carry no burden of doership. As this state matures, the ego is sublimated into identity. This is the fourth and final stage of egoism, and at this stage, you become eligible to enter the Central Region.

The thing I refer to as identity still exists, even in the Central Region. Think of it as the thinnest membrane that separates the soul from the Source. However, this membrane disappears when the Universe dissolves, and everything returns to the Center. During the final dissolution, all the identities of liberated souls merge into one, along with those of others. All individual identities are lost, and the newly formed identity brings forth creation again when the time comes.





Eternal Existence


In the Central Region, the aspirant experiences a profound sense of existence that permeates every aspect of their being. It’s like their heart becomes a playground for the entire creation, and they feel the continuum of existence. This feeling arises because the aspirant’s consciousness has evolved to such a state that they have transcended beyond consciousness to the potentiality that creates consciousness.

In this elevated state of being, the aspirant’s consciousness becomes all-pervasive, and they feel the Universe pulsating to the rhythm of their heart. The experience of eternal existence becomes vividly real, and the aspirant realizes that existence is not just limited to their physical form, but it encompasses everything in the Universe.

This heightened state of existence continues with the realization that existence is eternal and is not bound by time or space. The aspirant becomes aware of the timelessness and infinite nature of existence, where everything is interconnected, and there is no separation between the self and the Universe. Such a high state is a rare achievement, but much more lies ahead.





The Seven Rings of Splendor


When you enter the Central Region, you experience something magnificent that Babuji called the Seven Rings of Splendor. These rings have countless towering waves of power that emanate from the Center, and their beauty is indescribable. To traverse this region, one must ride one wave after another, and it can be challenging for a novice surfer. However, if you are a champion surfer, you go with the flow and find a sweet spot of balance and harmony, feeling entirely weightless (devoid of ego). It is a similar experience to riding the perfect wave. Someone once told me of Laird Hamilton, the legendary surfer, who described riding the big one as being inside a giant cathedral of water, flying and feeling as if time stands still. In the rings of splendor, one rides one big one after another in the infinite ocean.

To ride these waves effortlessly, the secret lies in absolute and total humility. One feels more insignificant than even a speck of dust. This is where the phenomenon of invertendo comes into play. The humbler one is, the higher one rises and the easier it is to ride the waves. Crossing the rings of splendor marks a stage where the swim to the Center begins. This is the final state, the highest level one can achieve in the spiritual anatomy project.





The Final State: Knowledgelessness and Non-Beingness


In the swim to the Center, the guru and the disciple resonate as one. The guru in front creates a slipstream for the disciple to swim effortlessly and follow. By this time, the state one is in can be described as one of knowledgelessness.

To understand this concept, it is crucial to grasp the idea of knowledge and ignorance. Knowledge is like a spotlight that illuminates a specific area while the surrounding areas remain in darkness. For instance, Copernicus’s discoveries revealed that the Earth was not the center of the solar system. This new knowledge removed ignorance. Every time we acquire knowledge, we recognize areas that we were previously ignorant about. Knowledge and ignorance coexist.

The polarity of knowledge and ignorance is resolved in the Central Region. At the final state, there is no “I” to experience, and as a result, there is no knowledge. Such an individual arrives at a condition that could be called non-beingness.

Let me explain. In our yatra, as we ascend toward the Absolute, we move from thinking, to feeling, becoming, being, and, lastly, non-being. We start with the mind and think of our connection with the Source. Over time thinking shifts to feeling the presence of the Source within our hearts and everywhere around us. As we continue to meditate, the feeling leads us on the path of becoming more and more in tune with the Source.

To put this in a more familiar context: Let’s say you live with your friend for a few weeks. During your stay, you are touched by your friend’s kind behavior, warm hospitality, and the joy and happiness his family shares. This inspires you to become like your friend and cultivate a lifestyle that can create such inner wealth. Like that, when we experience the Source within and without and feel the beautiful conditions blossom, we are inspired to change the temporary experience to a permanent one by becoming like the Source. Then a stage comes where the becoming transforms into permanently being in osmosis with the Source. While duly discharging all our duties and taking care of our responsibilities, we develop likeness with the Source—secure, poised, infinite, and unperturbed. When we have everything, then we need nothing.

How does this nothingness within express itself in one’s behavior? It manifests as complete stillness and poise in one’s behavior. When you meet someone in this highly elevated state, your heart will be moved by the absolute naturalness of their being. Even when they do the most mundane things, like passing the salad at the table or picking up a book to read, you can’t escape the beauty of their poise and stillness.

I remember an experience many years ago when I was in Courmettes, France, for a preceptor workshop. Chariji was training a group of us preceptors from Europe and North America, specifically in reading the condition and developing sensitivity. One evening, when I had some time with Chariji, I shared some of my observations with him. Then he asked me a question I wasn’t prepared for. He said, “Can you tell me who had the best condition among the people you have studied in this seminar?”

I shared with Chariji my observation about a Danish preceptor, whom I felt was seated in the lap of the Ultimate. Chariji smiled and asked why I thought so. I told him, “When I observe this lady, there is absolute naturalness in her being. Even when she holds her husband’s hand, you would not find amorousness in it. There would be simple love flowing. The ease with which she slips into meditation, and the aura of stillness that envelops her even after meditation, there is exquisite subtlety. I notice her absorbency, and I can feel the nothingness that creates such a profound presence.”

Chariji winked at me and said, “You are getting there.” And then he said, “This is the state of Brahmagati.” The word Brahmagati expresses the idea of absolute stillness of the original state. This absolute stillness also represents the infinite movement latent in the Center. When such a condition is created in a human being, it is called Brahmagati.i

Witnessing such a high state in someone who blissfully was carrying on with life and its demands is a good reminder that that goal is in reach for all of us. Our keen interest, willingness, and devotion make us worthy of the goal. Philosophy, with words like nothingness, non-beingness, and knowledglessness, creates cognitive complexity. The concepts can become difficult to grasp, and one starts feeling that this high state may not be for them. When you get such thoughts, remind yourself of this story where an everyday householder, with duties and responsibilities, and leading a content and happy life, was also siting in the lap of infinity. Our focus on creating purity, simplicity, love, and authenticity guides us toward where we need to be. Keep your eyes on the goal and allow the heart to guide you toward the grand destiny.





SPECIAL WILL


There is one aspect of Brahmagati that I would like to explain further. Whoever is in this state, whatever they offer in an affirmation, it shall come to pass. This is called special will. Special will can even affect the workings of nature. This infallibility of will is, in fact, the real interpretation of the characteristic feature of Brahmagati.

Special will admits no doubt or misgiving. The negative ideas are out of the realm of your imagination. Only that which is affirmed, which is “to be,” remains in sight. Confidence grows so strong that nothing contrary can ever stand in the way. One does not try to dispel doubts; there is no doubt at all.

Once, a father and son were skiing down the wintry slopes of a steep mountain. Looking down at a patch where fresh powder had fallen the previous night, the father said, “Son, watch out for the rocks and those trees with bent branches.” The son, staring intently ahead, said, “What rocks and trees? I see only the trail.” Such clarity and certainty are the quintessence of special will.

The special will is used for spiritual work and to fulfill nature’s orders. But that doesn’t mean you cannot benefit from it. You can take inspiration from such a mindset and avoid harboring thoughts of failure or disappointment. Before starting any work, offer the affirmation that it’s completed successfully, and then begin the task in remembrance of the divine.



The promise of human life is the opportunity to make the quantum jump from where we are now into the Center. Life on Earth as a human being is the opportunity to evolve willfully. Right up to the human level, evolution has been automatic. As a human being, you get the chance to make the jump into the Center. I pray that you adopt the highest as your real goal and practice like never before to evolve your consciousness and rightfully claim the spot that awaits you in the highest.





SELF-REFLECTION


What plans might you put in place to help you evolve your consciousness?

Can you imagine living a life in which everything flows without thought or analysis or worry or reaction, and everything that happens is perfect for the circumstance?





Footnote


i Brahma is derived from the word bruha, meaning “expansion,” and gati means “state.” This is the state of infinite expansion in the Ultimate.





Conclusion


In meditation, we close our eyes and open our hearts. The open heart receives the gift. Appreciating the gift is gratitude, and gratitude creates a condition in our hearts. When we allow the condition to carry us, we soar toward love. That love within creates reverence for the Absolute. As we grow in reverence, the heart attracts waves of grace. As we ride on the waves of grace, submission begins. Submission creates serenity, and in serenity begins surrender. The state of surrender leads us to merger.

Each meditation is a love story. It is the union of the soul with the higher self. It’s the journey of the drop becoming one with the ocean.

Let yours be a journey with love overflowing in the heart. Love that drowns you because without drowning in love, there is no rising. With all my heart, I pray you bask in love and cherish oneness on this journey that begins and ends in the deepest recesses of your heart. The way can be narrow and dark. At times it can seem lonely and overwhelming. The ascent can be steep and slippery. But remember what you seek is within you. I know the way and I am here to help you and support you at every step. I hope you soar toward infinity and become one with it. The best gift you can give to the Universe is the gift of your transformed self.





Discover Your Next Great Read

Get sneak peeks, book recommendations, and news about your favorite authors.





Tap here to learn more.





ABOUT THE AUTHOR


Daaji, also known as Kamlesh D. Patel, is the fourth and current spiritual guide of the global Heartfulness movement. He has spent the past four decades training people across the globe in Heartfulness meditation. He is the author of numerous books, including Designing Destiny and USA Today bestseller The Heartfulness Way. He gives keynote addresses at conferences and conducts workshops around the world. His passion lies in grassroots efforts, especially in taking meditation to the villages of India. Daaji enjoys going on nature walks with his grandchildren in Kanha Shanti Vanam, India, where he lives with his family.





ALSO BY KAMLESH D. PATEL


The Heartfulness Way:

Heart-Based Meditations for Spiritual Transformation

Designing Destiny:

Heartfulness Practices to Find Your Purpose and Fulfill Your Potential





Praise for Daaji and

Spiritual Anatomy


“Exceptional… Spiritual Anatomy blends the wisdom of yogic philosophy with practical techniques to unlock your infinite potential.”

—Deepak Chopra, New York Times bestselling author of Quantum Body



“The challenge for so many of us is how to achieve our purpose in the face of modern life. Through Spiritual Anatomy, Daaji offers us the path to take our fragmented lives and integrate them to achieve our highest potential. He also reminds us that the path to elevated consciousness is always through the heart.”

—James R. Doty, MD, Professor of Neurosurgery at Stanford University School of Medicine, and bestselling author of Into the Magic Shop



“Using awareness and meditation as tools for health, Daaji’s work brings a most valuable heart into the field of healing science. Daaji gifts readers an important resource for traversing personal transformation.”

—Sharon Salzberg, New York Times bestselling author of Lovingkindness and Real Life



“Daaji offers a profound road map and guide, as Spiritual Anatomy reveals our opportunity to actively engage the chakras in our spiritual journey.”

—Lisa Miller, PhD, Columbia professor, and New York Times bestselling author of The Spiritual Child and The Awakened Brain





GLOSSARY


Please note that alternative common spellings are given after some words, for example: samadhi or samaadhi. The phonetic spelling of each Sanskrit word is put in parentheses after the word, for example: abhyas or abhyasa (abhyaas).

abhoodhiyat. The spiritual condition of insignificance.

abhyas or abhyasa (abhyaas). Practice.

abhyasi. Aspirant; one who practices yoga in order to achieve union with higher Self.

aghori babas. Devotees of Shiva manifested as Bhairava; monists who seek release from the cycle of reincarnation.

Aham Brahmasmi (aham brahmaasmi). I am Brahman/God.

ahuti. Offering. See pranahuti.

Ajna Chakra or Agya Chakra (aajnaa chakra). The chakra located between the eyebrows; the sixth chakra.

anahat ajapa. Natural vibration of the heart.

Anahata chakra. The heart chakra, first chakra.

Arjuna. Lord Krishna’s devotee, and one of the Pandavas (five brothers) to whom Lord Krishna gave the Gita in the epic Mahabharata.

Aum. A sacred syllable; the primordial vibration of space that has been heard by saints and mystics throughout history.

avaran or avarana, or aavaran or aavarana. Layers of grossness; coverings.

Baba. Holy man; guru.

Babuji. Affectionate name for Shri Ram Chandra of Shahjahanpur, the second guru of the Sahaj Marg system, disciple of Lalaji and the founder-president of Shri Ram Chandra Mission, the raja-yoga system of Sahaj Marg.

Bhagwad Gita or Bhagavad Gita. See Gita.

bhoga or bhogam or bhog (bhogaa). The process of undergoing the effects of impressions; experience; enjoyment; suffering.

Bhūmā. The Center.

Brahm or Brahman. Center, God, Ultimate, higher self.

Brahma Randhra or Brahmarandhra. Brahman (higher self) + randhra (aperture). A point or opening near the twelfth chakra.

brahmagati. Divine state, state of Brahman.

Brahmand (brahmaanda) Mandal or brahmanda desh. Mental sphere, supramaterial sphere, cosmic region; sphere where everything manifests under a subtle shape before taking place in the material world.

chakra. Center of supervital forces located in different parts of the body; a wheel of energy that creates an energy field like a magnet.

Chariji. Affectionate name for Shri Parthasarathi Rajagopalachari, the third in the line of Masters in Heartfulness.

dheerata. Fortitude.

Gita (Geeta). The Bhagavad Gita, Song of God; divine knowledge given to Arjuna by Lord Krishna in the epic Mahabharata.

guru. One who transmits light, knowledge; a spiritual teacher; literally, one who dispels darkness; a guru dispels the darkness of ignorance through the light of knowledge.

Hanumaan (Hanumaan). Lord Rama’s faithful servant in the epic Ramayana.

invertendo. Term coined by Babuji to describe the apparent inversions truth undergoes as it moves through higher levels of abstraction.

karma. Action.

koshas. Five energetic sheaths, or layers, that surround the soul.

Krishna. See Lord Krishna.

Lalaji. Affectionate name for Ram Chandra of Fatehgarh, the founder-president of Shri Ram Chandra Mission, the raja-yoga system of Sahaj Marg.

layayastha. Merger; “laya” (dissolution) + “avastha” (state); the merging with various stages of consciousness as we move from one chakra to another. The final merger is with the Center.

Lord Krishna. Most recent incarnation of Vishnu; divine personality in the epic Mahabharata.

maha-kal-chakra (maha-kaal-chakra). The wheel of the Supreme.

Maha samadhi (mahaa samaadhi). The final samadhi when saints renounce their body and enter the brighter world.

Manipura. Navel chakra; mani (jewels) + pura (city); the dwelling place of jewels.

Mooladhar. Root chakra; provides the primary support for existence and perpetuates the most fundamental need for survival.

Nasadiya Sukta. Hymn of creation found in the Rig Veda, a collection of ancient hymns, the earliest of four Vedas, and one of the most sacred texts in Hinduism.

Para-Brahma. The first wave of creation, through which the currents of absolute vibration began to flow.

Parabrahmand Mandal. The Paracosmic Region.

Pind Pradesh (pinda pradesha) or Pind Desh (pinda desha). Material sphere; the Heart Region.

Prabhu. Region of the Absolute. The region covered by tenth, eleventh, and twelfth chakras.

prakriti. The creation.

prana (praana). Life; breath; spiritual energy; life force; souls.

pranahuti (praanaahuti). Process of yogic transmission; the offering of the life force into the aspirant’s heart.

Pransya prana. The life of life. Early reference to Transmission found in the Nasadiya Sukta, the Vedic hymn of creation.

Prapanna. A spiritual stage at eighth chakra; also, one who has surrendered.

Prapanna-Prabhu. Spiritual condition experienced as being both the master and one who has surrendered. The condition at the ninth chakra.

prapatti. State of loving dependence and a reverential and joyful acceptance of all that comes our way in life.

purusha. See Para-Brahma.

Radha (Raadhaa). Lord Krishna’s spiritual companion and his beloved.

Raja Yoga. Ancient system or science followed by the great rishis (seers, saints) that helps gently guide the mind toward right thinking and temperance to realize the self or God. Usually used for meditative practices, as distinguished from hatha yoga (yoga of the body).

Sahaj Marg. Natural path, simple path.

Sahasra Dala, Sahasradala, Sahasra Dal Kamal (Sahasra Dala Kamala). Also called SDK, crown chakra, lotus of a thousand petals.

Sayujyata. Merger and beyond. Fourth stage of the flowering of a chakra.

Salokyata. Coexisting in the same world. First stage of the flowering of a chakra.

samadhi or samaadhi. Original balance; state in which we stay attached to reality. In Sahaj Marg, the return to the original condition, which reigned in the beginning. The eighth limb of Patanjali’s yoga.

Sameepyata. Nearness. The second stage of the flowering of a chakra.

samskaras (samskaaraas). Impressions.

Saranagati. See prapatti.

Saraswati. Goddess of knowledge; knowledge point at the eighth chakra.

Saroopyata. Identicality. The third stage of the flowering of a chakra.

Sat-chit-ananda or Satchidananda (satchidanaanda). Existence-consciousness-bliss.

satpad or satyapad. In Sahaj Marg, the sphere where truth is predominant, a region of light though in a very fine state.

sitting. A session of meditation, usually lasting from twenty minutes to an hour, in which the guru or a Heartfulness trainer meditates with a group or an individual for the purpose of cleaning and transmission.

spiritual anatomy. The subtle energetic system of the human being.

subtle bodies. Layers of the human energy field. The four main subtle bodies are Chit (consciousness), Manas (mind), Buddhi (intellect), and Ahankar (ego).

superconsciousness. Higher states of consciousness that are beyond the sensory perception.

Swadhisthana. Swa (self) + adhisthana (dwelling place): dwelling place of the lower self, or sacral chakra.

Trikuti. The point above the nose between the two eyebrows; one of the points of concentration.

Uparati. State of self-withdrawal. Vairagya matures into Uparati.

Vairagya. State of loving detachment. Renunciation.

vikshep or vikshepa. Subtle distortions, distraction, mental wandering.

Vishnu. The preserver; one of the Hindu Trinity, the others being Brahma and Shiva.

yatra. A sacred journey to the center within.

yoga. A system of philosophy and practice for uniting the lower self with the higher Self, or God.





HEARTFULNESS RESOURCES


I, and everyone at the Heartfulness Institute, would be honored to support you in your journey to elevated consciousness. Whether you’re just learning to meditate or you’re a seeker looking to deepen your practice, I hope these resources will be useful to you.

Visit us on our website at https://heartfulness.org.

Visit the book website at https://spiritualanatomy.com.

Download our app: https://www.heartfulnessapp.org.

Follow with us on social: @heartfulness on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.

Connect with a trainer or find a Heartfulness Center near you at https://heartfulness.my/heartspots.





ABOUT HEARTFULNESS


Heartfulness offers a simple set of meditative practices and lifestyle changes, first developed at the turn of the twentieth century and formalized into teaching through the Shri Ram Chandra Mission in 1945. These practices are a modern form of Yoga designed to promote contentment, inner calm, compassion, courage, and clarity of thought. The Heartfulness practices are fit for people over the age of fifteen from all walks of life, cultures, religious beliefs, and economic situations. More than 5,000 Heartfulness Centers are supported by many thousands of certified volunteer trainers and practitioners in 160 countries. Learn more at www.heartfulness.org.





NOTES





Chapter 1. Your Inner Journey: The Key to Real Transformation


1. Ganganatha Jha Patanjali and S. Subrahmanya Sastri, The Yoga-Darshana: Comprising the Sutras of Patanjali with the Bhasya of Vyasa (Singapore: Asian Humanities Press, 2004), 1.1; Vyasa, Yoga Bhashya (1:1).

2. Karen V. Smit and Steven B. Shirey, “Kimberlites: Earth’s Diamond Delivery System,” Gems & Gemology 55, no. 2 (Summer 2019), GIA, https://www.gia.edu/gems-gemology/summer-2019-kimberlites-earths-diamond-delivery-system.

3. Lisa Miller, PhD, The Awakened Brain: The New Science of Spirituality and Our Quest for an Inspired Life (New York: Random House, 2021), 8.





Chapter 2. Your True Potential


4. Thomas Gilovich and Victoria Husted Medvec, “The Temporal Pattern to the Experience of Regret,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67, no. 3 (September 1994): 357–365, https://psycnet.apa.org/buy/1995-05382-001; S. Davidi and T. Gilovich, “The Ideal Road Not Taken: The Self-Discrepancies Involved in People’s Most Enduring Regrets,” Emotion 18, no. 3 (2018): 439–452, https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000326.

5. Susan Kelley, “Woulda, coulda, shoulda: the haunting regret of failing our ideal selves,” Cornell Chronical, May 24, 2018, https://news.cornell.edu/stories/2018/05/woulda-coulda-shoulda-haunting-regret-failing-our-ideal-selves.





Chapter 3. The Story of the Soul


6. Sophie Putka, “This Cyclic Model of the Universe Has Cosmologists Rethinking the Big Bang,” Discover, July 29, 2021, https://www.discovermagazine.com/the-sciences/this-cyclic-model-of-the-universe-has-cosmologists-rethinking-the-big-bang.





Chapter 4. Mapping the Journey to the Center


7. Eckhart Tolle, A New Earth: Awakening to Your Life’s Purpose (New York: Dutton, 2005), 41.

8. Anurag Shrivastava, Bikesh K. Singh, Dwivedi Krishna, et al., “Effect of Heartfulness Meditation Among Long-Term, Short-Term and Non-meditators on Prefrontal Cortex Activity of Brain Using Machine Learning Classification: A Cross-Sectional Study,” Cureus 15, no. 2 (February 14, 2023): e34977, doi:10.7759/cureus.34977.

9. Jayaram Thimmapuram, Robert Pargament, Kedesha Sibliss, et al., “Effect of Heartfulness Meditation on Burnout, Emotional Wellness, and Telomere Length in Health Care Professionals,” Journal of Community Hospital Internal Medicine Perspectives 7, no. 1 (2017): 21–27, doi:10.1080/20009666.2016.1270806.

10. Kunai Desai, Pratibha Gupta, Priti Parikh, et al., “Impact of Virtual Heartfulness Meditation Program on Stress, Quality of Sleep, and Psychological Wellbeing During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Mixed-Method Study,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18, no. 21 (October 22, 2021): 11114, doi:10.3390/ijerph182111114.

11. Bhuvnesh Sankar Sylapan, Ajay Kumar Nair, Krishnamurthy Jayanna, et al., “Meditation, Well-Being and Cognition in Heartfulness Meditators—A Pilot Study,” Consciousness and Cognition 86 (November 2020): 103032, doi:10.1016/j.concog.2020.103032.





Chapter 9. The Elephant and the Chair: Conditioning that Binds Us


12. A. H. Hastorf and H. Cantril, “They Saw a Game; A Case Study,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 49 no. 1 (1954): 129–134, https://doi.org/10.1037/h0057880.





Chapter 10. Five Chakras of the Heart Region: The Realm of Opposites


13. Juliana Ukiomogbe, “Where Are Emotions Felt in the Body? This Infographic Will Tell You,” infographic, Greatist, September 9, 2020, https://greatist.com/connect/emotional-body-maps-infographic#infographic.

14. Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 2, 2:62–2:63.





Chapter 15. The Third Chakra: Love


15. Luke 23:34 (New International Version).





Chapter 16. The Fourth Chakra: Courage


16. Patel, Kamlesh D., “Confidence, Courage and Self-Awareness” in The Wisdom Bridge (p. 194), 2022.





Chapter 18. Freedom from Freedom: The Gift of the Heart


17. Gabriel A. Radvansky, Sabine A. Krawietz, and Andrea K. Tamplin, “Walking Through Doorways Causes Forgetting: Further Explorations,” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 64, no. 8 (August 2011): 1632–1645, https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2011.571267.

18. Melissa Hughes, “3 Ways Kindness Changes the Brain,” Melissa Hughes (website), updated January 8, 2022, https://www.melissahughes.rocks/post/3-ways-kindness-changes-the-brain.

19. Nigel Mathers, “Compassion and the Science of Kindness: Harvard Davis Lecture 2015,” British Journal of General Practice 66, no. 648 (July 2016): e525–e527, https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp16X686041.





Chapter 19. The Mind Region: A Journey to Humility


20. Patel, Kamlesh D., “Confidence, Courage and Self-Awareness” in The Wisdom Bridge (p. 191), 2022.





Chapter 20. The Sixth Chakra: Selflessness


21. Matthew 5:8 (NIV).

22. The Sutta-Nipata: A New Translation from the Pali Canon, translated by H. Saddhatissa (Oxfordshire, UK: RoutledgeCurzon, 1995), I, 8.





Chapter 22. The Eighth Chakra: Surrender


23. Hellmuth Hecker, “Angulimala: A Murderer’s Road to Sainthood,” story adaptation, Access to Insight, Barre Center for Buddhist Studies, 2007, https://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/hecker/wheel312.html.

24. Dacher Keltner and Jonathan Haidt, “Approaching Awe, a Moral, Spiritual, and Aesthetic Emotion,” Cognition and Emotion, 17 no. 2 (2003): 297–314, https://doi.org/10.1080/02699930302297.





Chapter 23. The Ninth Chakra: Insignificance


25. Dr. Joel Hoomans, “35,000 Decisions: The Great Choices of Strategic Leaders,” The Leading Edge (blog), Roberts Wesleyan College, March 20, 2015, https://go.roberts.edu/leadingedge/the-great-choices-of-strategic-leaders.





Chapter 25. The Eleventh Chakra: Restlessness


26. Richard S. Westfall, Never at Rest:A Biography of Isaac Newton (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1983), chap. 4.

27. Scalora, Suza & Anderson, Micheline & Crete, Abigail & Mistur, Elisabeth & Chapman, Amy & Miller, Lisa. (2022). A Campus-Based Spiritual-Mind-Body Prevention Intervention Against Symptoms of Depression and Trauma; An Open Trial of Awakened Awareness. Mental Health & Prevention. 25. 200229. 10.1016/j.mhp.2022.200229.





Chapter 27. Entry into the Central Region


28. Chandogya Upanishad 7:24:1.





“In this simple and elegant book, Daaji reveals the ancient secrets of Heartfulness meditation for a well-integrated life. A must-read for anyone interested in incorporating meditation into their lifestyle.”

— Sanjay Gupta, MD , neurosurgeon, Emmy® Award-winning chief medical correspondent for CNN, and bestselling author of Monday Mornings



“This book, The Heartfulness Way , is truly transformational and is going to make a big difference in the lives of so many people across the globe.”

—Pankaj Gupta, PhD , executive director, Centre for Ethics, Spirituality and Sustainability at O.P. Jindal Global University, Delhi NCR



“All of us long to belong and try to connect to the Creator and this ­universe in various ways. This book helps us to connect holistically, ­meaningfully, and more importantly, ‘simply,’ through Heartfulness meditation. Giving ourselves the space to look within for just a few minutes in a day can keep us going, growing, and glowing throughout the day. The Heartfulness Way makes the journey as enjoyable as the destination.”

—Latha Rajan , cofounder of the Chennai Literary Association, and managing director of the Ma Foi Foundation



“The Heartfulness Way offers an eminently clear and practical path to the Divinity that lies within each of us. Highly recommended.”

— Robert Schwartz , author of Your Soul’s Plan and

Your Soul’s Gift



“The Heartfulness Way represents a revolution in the field of spirituality. Spiritualism is a process of self-realization. Every individual being unique, they experience this in different ways. But all seekers can be benefited by The Heartfulness Way , including experienced meditators. A practical and inspirational guidebook, its clarion call is that personal experience is greater than any spiritual knowledge or belief can ever be. But this book goes much further than that! It provides a well-honed method for spiritual awakening. Moreover, it shows us how to receive yogic transmission, or pranahuti , which easily enables any seeker to experience states of being that were once thought to be reserved for great yogis and renunciates. Read it, try its practices, experience yogic transmission, and see for yourself!”

—Suresh Prabhu , Minister of Commerce and Industry

of India



“If you have picked up The Heartfulness Way , then you are one of the many of people looking for answers. Congratulations. You have found the key. This book will take you on a journey of self-comprehension, leading to the eventual discovery of your true potential.

Meditation is an age-old practice, and a successful one. This is perhaps the only way a person can face their own self and set themselves free. Put together from a series of conversations between teacher and student, the authors of this book have created something so powerful and profound that it makes me wonder how many lives it will potentially change.

I find immense pride in my association with Kamlesh D. Patel, and this book fills me with utmost respect for its two authors, who have embarked on the holy path of spiritual transformation. It is rare in today’s age to see people share their insight and teach from their experiences.

Om Namah Shivay.”

—C.B. Patel , owner, Gujarat Samachar; Asian Voice



“The Heartfulness Way is a truly extraordinary book, and a valuable guide to the serious spiritual seeker on the path to self-revelation. It is addressed to the heart, and if for that reason alone, cannot fail to profoundly move the reader. If approached in the right spirit, The Heartfulness Way can trigger a far-reaching, inner transformation. It is warmly recommended.”

—Ramnath Narayanswamy , IIM Bangalore



“Since 2000 when, as Beavercreek mayor, I officiated the grand opening of the Dayton Heartfulness/Natural Path Meditation Center, I have been a major supporter of this valuable community resource that provides free training in Heartfulness relaxation and meditation not just locally, but also globally! The local Heartfuness Center now services hundreds, including many of our community’s first responders. It is my hope that many more people can take advantage of this wonderful resource and learn these simple yet powerful techniques through The Heartfulness Way .”

—Rick Perales , Ohio State Representative



“Over twenty years ago, when I was introduced to the Heartfulness meditation practice, I could not have anticipated how much it would come to mean to me with each passing day. Nor could I have anticipated the harmony and purpose that I would find in my life as a result. Whether you are ardent practioner of meditation, just curious, or perhaps even skeptical, The Heartfulness Way is a must-read. Answers leap magically from its pages, making it simple to understand meditation and its purpose. To read this book is to be immersed in a symphony of revelations.”

—Vani Kola , managing director, Kalaari Capital



“The Heartfulness Way beautifully highlights the timeless philosophy of India’s yogic tradition, while clearly articulating a simple and direct path for the modern seeker.”

—Shripad Naik , Minister of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH), India



“In my many decades as a management consultant to governments and Fortune 500 companies alike, I have realized that the external success of any organization depends on its internal health and integration. Similarly, the external success of any individual depends on their own level of personal integration and wellness. When you’re too caught up in your own problems, you can’t achieve anything great! But how to achieve that crucial level of personal integration and wellness? I have personally found Heartfulness meditation to be a critical tool in this regard. Through it, the heart assumes an executive function, and all of our faculties become aligned with it. When all of our energies are aligned in their purpose and work in a single channel, we become focused and empowered. As a result, we become effective. And because we are guided by the heart, we also express a deep and natural morality in all that we do. The Heartfulness Way masterfully demonstrates how to achieve personal integration, and should be indispensable to anyone who is serious about self-development.”

—Ichak Adizes, PhD, MBA , founder and president of

the Adizes Institute



“The Heartfulness Way is an invaluable addition to the vast body of literature on meditation. Its message is optimistic, pointing to the innate goodness that lies in each of our hearts, and showing us how to grow into our most authentic and best selves. As a mindfulness practitioner, I have long felt that the root of mindfulness is ‘Heartfulness,’ so I am pleased to witness this concept taking hold, and I look forward to the day that everyone aspires toward ‘heartful’ living.”

—Tim Ryan, US representative of Ohio, and author of

A Mindful Nation



“The terms ‘yoga’ and ‘spirituality’ have a lot of mystery attached to them. In The Heartfulness Way , renowned yoga guru Kamlesh D. Patel, more popularly known as Daaji, demystifies the whole concept in layman’s terms. Daaji’s words are simple, lucid, and go straight to the point. Joshua Pollock, a Heartfulness practitioner and trainer, joins hands with Daaji in writing this groundbreaking book. Their dialogues recall those of Arjuna and Lord Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita, in which the guru satisfies the disciple’s spiritual hunger and quest for knowledge. I am sure that The Heartfulness Way signifies a new horizon in the field of yoga and spirituality.”

—Tejinder Sharma, MBE , General Secretary, Katha UK



“A truly praiseworthy effort in the direction of clarifying many of the misconceptions about meditation. The one idea or discipline which is engaging the attention of the East and the West today is meditation. Through this book, Kamlesh D. Patel, more popularly known as Daaji, has rendered a great service to the fraternity of spiritual seekers. He has clarified beautifully the ideas such as sadhana (or spiritual discipline), anubhuti (or experience), etc. But he is emphatic that meditation should result in fundamental transformation and lead one to an evolved way of life. I am sure this book would attract many to attempt the discipline of meditation for a true and lasting betterment of their lives.”

—Swami Shantatmananda , secretary, Ramakrishna Mission, New Delhi, India



“The Heartfulness Way explains meditation’s higher purpose with clarity and humility.”

—Philip Goldberg , author of American Veda



“With The Heartfulness Way , Daaji has demystified spirituality.”

—Lt. Gen. S.R.R. Aiyengar, PVSM, AVSM, VSM (Ret.)



“Throughout my musical career, Heartfulness has been a perennial source of inspiration. This book beautifully describes how to cultivate that inspiration from within and share it with others.”

—Maestro Shashank Subramanyam , Grammy-nominated Indian classical flautist





Publisher’s Note

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering psychological, financial, legal, or other professional services. If expert assistance or counseling is needed, the services of a competent professional should be sought.

Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Books

Copyright © 2018 by Heartfulness Institute

Reveal Press

An imprint of New Harbinger Publications, Inc.

New Harbinger Publications, Inc.

5674 Shattuck Avenue

Oakland, CA 94609

www.newharbinger.com

Cover design by Uma Maheswari

Cover art by Laura Laine

Acquired by Wendy Millstine

Edited by Gretel Hakanson

All Rights Reserved


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data on file





Contents

Foreword

Preface

Introduction

Part 1 : Why Heartfulness

1. The Seeker’s Journey

2. Demystifying Meditation

Attitude

Yogic Transmission

Part 2 : Practicing Heartfulness

3. Meditation

When and Where to Meditate

The Meditative Posture

Relaxation

How to Meditate

How Long to Meditate

The Meditative State

4. Cleaning

Doing the Cleaning

5. Prayer

Connecting Through Prayer

The Heartfulness Prayer

Part 3 : The Guru

6. Role of the Guru

Conclusion

Afterword

Experience Heartfulness

Glossary





Foreword



M y parents were born and raised in India, where they met and fell in love while in medical school. However, they dreamed of a different life for themselves and their future family, and so upon graduating from medical school, they bravely moved to the United States. I was born a few years after that as part of the first generation of ethnically Indian Hindus raised in the United States.

When my parents moved to the United States, they were still young medical residents. But in just a few short years, they went from new immigrants struggling to support themselves to new physicians struggling to support not only themselves, but also their children, their siblings, and their parents. Through their extraordinary work ethic and dedication to family, my parents eventually flourished in their careers, and I grew up as the direct beneficiary of their American Dream, enjoying the many privileges and resources that they worked so hard to attain.

But even as my parents achieved all the traditional markers of success–salary, status, and security–they realized that making a living did not always equate to making a life. Indeed, making a life also requires one to focus on the art of living–on loving relationships, emotional intelligence, and a sense of meaning and purpose. In many ways, my parents’ journey reflects Abraham Maslow’s famous “hierarchy of needs” theory, which postulates that only after sustenance, security, and community are established can one achieve self-actualization.

While on her spiritual journey, my mother encountered Heartfulness and began her practice in earnest. She soon became a Heartfulness trainer and served as a meditation facilitator within the tradition, and she hosted people in our house every Sunday morning for meditation and fellowship. Now more than thirty years later, more than a dozen of my family members regularly practice Heartfulness, and my grandmother and my first cousin’s wife joined my mother as trainers.

Even though I was still a child at the time, I remember a significant shift in the energy and vibrations within our house after my mother began leading Heartfulness groups there. Indeed, our house became a home, and the normal tensions and anxieties of family life seemed to suddenly subside. Just as I was a beneficiary of my parent’s professional and financial success, I became a beneficiary of my mother’s spiritual aspirations and values. I believe that being raised in that environment directly led to the scholarly and spiritual work I do today as the Dean of Religious Life at the University of Southern California.

Heartfulness is based on the ancient Indian spiritual practice of raja yoga , which recognizes that as sentient beings, our nature is inherently divine, and that the path to self-realization is inward, internal, and introspective. Heartfulness offers a meditation technique that cultivates and nourishes the divine light that burns in each of our hearts, thereby cleansing us of our accumulated negative and afflictive emotions and experiences. In this way, Heartfulness translates the timeless spiritual truths of India into a timely spiritual practice for the here and now.

In the spiritual traditions of India, a guru , or spiritual teacher, serves as a guide and mentor for one’s spiritual journey, in much the same way that a professor, coach, or instructor might for academic, athletic, and artistic endeavors. For the Heartfulness tradition, the spiritual guide is Kamlesh D. Patel, affectionately known as Daaji. But unlike the gurus of ancient India, Daaji is not an ascetic, a monk, a renunciate, a mendicant, nor an itin­erant. Rather, he is a householder, a scientist, a father, a grand­father, and a husband. And therefore his articulation of Heartfulness is not just a theoretical construct, but an integrative and applied approach of practical spirituality for everyday living.

The Heartfulness Way beautifully highlights the living tra­dition of raja yoga and the vision of Daaji. It is an elegant and eloquent introduction to Heartfulness, a profound meditative practice that has positively transformed my family.

I hope it does the same for you and yours …

—Varun Soni, PhD

Dean of Religious Life

Vice Provost of Campus Wellness and Crisis Intervention

University of Southern California





Preface



W e never know what life has in store for us, what is just around the corner, and that is part and parcel of the mystery and beauty of living. I have received many blessings during my six decades on this Earth, and one of those happened while I was a teenager, studying pharmacy in Ahmedabad in India in 1976. Thanks to one of my college pals, I came across Heartfulness meditation, and a few months later was face-­to-­face with the remarkable man who immediately became my first guru, who guided me in this practice. His name was Ram Chandra, and we called him Babuji.

The effect of the very first Heartfulness meditation on me was so profound that it was clear I had found my direction and anchor in life. But the effect of meeting Babuji was beyond even that—­something so precious and subtle in its essence that it defies description. While universes and dimensions have opened in my inner world since that time, it is only one aspect of what has unfolded during these last four decades. What is even more wonderful is the wealth of everyday qualities that have come through Heartfulness practice—­qualities such as love, acceptance, humility, service, compassion, empathy, and a higher purpose to existence.

It all starts with the simple act of meditation. Nothing much is required of us as we sit quietly, close our eyes, and focus within on the Source of all existence in our hearts. If we can approach that act of meditation with childlike wonder and innocence, our inner universe unfolds before us naturally. In a heart-­based meditation practice, we explore and experience the simplest and purest aspect of our existence, our soul. Everything about it is so natural.

The Heartfulness practices in this book nurture our souls, remove the weeds and mud that keep them hidden, and set free that spark of childlike innocence and wonder that makes life truly meaningful. At the same time, we have to live in the day-­to-­day world of urban stress, wages and mortgages, careers and relationships. Heartfulness practices help us simplify our responses and navigate our daily lives in an enriching, fulfilling manner.

If you knew there was a practical way to transcend suffering and fly into the sky of hope and contentment, would you be interested? That is exactly what Heartfulness offers—­not by removing problems or by shutting them out, but by transforming us from the inside out so that we see the world in a new way, without the filters of our limitations.

In the Heartfulness way, we explore and expand our consciousness, and even go beyond consciousness to uncover true potentiality. I hope you enjoy this book and benefit from what I have learned on this journey of life so far.

—Kamlesh D. Patel

June 2018





Introduction



I n August 2015, as I sat in my home office in Chennai, India, my wife appeared with my phone. “It’s Kamlesh calling from Europe,” she said, laughing. Apparently, our two-­year-­old daughter had answered the phone and held her own conversation with him for some time before my wife noticed. When I picked up the phone, he said, “I would like you to write a book about meditation.” I immediately agreed, but I also had a little trepidation. Because Kamlesh has been meditating for over forty years and is a spiritual guide to seekers all over the world, I felt he was far more qualified to write a book on this subject.

When we met weeks later, I said, “Maybe you should write this book instead.”

He laughed and replied, “We’ll write it together.”

Over the course of two years, we had numerous wide-­ranging discussions in locations throughout India and the United States. The Heartfulness Way chronicles those conversations.

About twenty years earlier, a fascination with books prompted my interest in meditation. As a teenager, I found myself drawn to the subject of spirituality. I was sure that if I searched long enough through my parents’ enormous book collection, I would find some obscure and esoteric text, and from its pages, all the great secrets of the universe would pour out.

First, I encountered the Tao Te Ching , penned by the eminent sage Lao Tzu, supposedly at the point of a spear. It mesmerized me with its simplicity and wisdom, and fanned the flames of spiritual craving in my heart. This led me to other books. I poured through the literature of the Buddhists, Taoists, Sufis, Christians, and others. I read Aristotle and Augustine, Emerson and Epicurus. Gradually it dawned on me that through all my reading, I had only learned about the experiences and ideas of others. What about my own? Until this point, all my knowledge was abstract. I had become familiar with so many spiritual ideas, but in a bookish way. I had come across so many terms—­enlightenment, satori, samadhi, illumination . I needed to find out on my own what these concepts meant, and I knew that this required a practical approach.

I embarked on a mad dash through various practices. I took meditation classes, tried yoga, and studied martial arts. Once, I met a famous Zen master. When he looked at me, I only managed to stammer, “I’ve never met a master before.”

“But you will!” he replied.

By then, I was already meditating on a daily basis. However, I did not find meditation to be gratifying. It was a real struggle—­a difficult and tedious affair. After a few years of searching, my enthusiasm started to wane. Eventually, I gave up my quest, empty-­handed and a little disillusioned.

In August 2002, I met a stranger while standing outside a local shop. In the course of our conversation, I learned that she practiced a form of meditation known alternately as Sahaj Marg (which means “natural path” in Hindi) and Heartfulness. She spoke as if the practice of Heartfulness had really changed her life.

Despite my curiosity about this new kind of meditation, I was also a little skeptical. By now, I had become immune to the various claims made about meditation. My own experience of meditation had been different. Perhaps I just wasn’t cut out to meditate, I thought. Additionally, I suspected that a true path might not be found so easily. I wondered whether finding a capable teacher might involve trekking deep into the Himalayas or traveling to some other remote locale. What are the odds of finding something authentic during a chance encounter on the street? But something else inside me said, “It’s possible … ”

Then, one bright September morning, my mother called me. She was in tears. My little sister had just been in a car accident. She was unconscious and on her way to the hospital. Nobody knew if she would live or die, and I was halfway across the country. I could do nothing. Toward midnight, my sister was dead at the age of sixteen.

These are the times when people tend to seek meaning, spirituality, and hope. But I had already done that and come up empty. Nevertheless, I set up a meeting with a Heartfulness trainer named Brian Jones. Brian is a professional artist. We met at his studio, which was filled with paintings in varying stages of completion. Over coffee, I was impressed to learn that all Heartfulness trainers are volunteers, that none of them accept any fee for their service. Brian then invited me into an adjacent room to meditate, or to give me a “sitting,” as he called it. He motioned me to a chair and took the seat across from me. He explained how to meditate on the heart and said that his role would simply be to meditate along with me and that this would help facilitate my own meditation. He then asked me to close my eyes and said, “Please start.”

It is difficult to explain what followed. It wasn’t until much later that I understood that I had experienced a glimpse of samadhi —­a state of profound inner equanimity, where you drift beyond yourself, beyond the here and now, beyond everything. When he broke the meditation by saying, “That’s all,” I felt as if I had been yanked out of eternity.

Quietly, we sat in the post-­meditative stillness, enjoying its languid beauty. In that moment, I knew that I had experienced something unique—­something for which I had been thirsting my whole life. I did not know what that “something” was, but for the first time in memory, my heart was absolutely joyful and at peace. Later, I would learn that this experience was brought about by something called “yogic transmission.”

Heartfulness is an integrated approach that consists of three core practices: meditation, cleaning, and prayer. These three practices are supported by yogic transmission, which is the essence of the Heartfulness approach and the key to its transformative potential.

Through meditation, we move from the complexity of mind to the simplicity of heart. Everything starts with the heart. When the heart is at peace, the mind is at rest. When the heart is content, the mind gains insight, clarity, and wisdom. We often think that the heart and mind are two distinct entities that are often in conflict with one another. In Heartfulness meditation, we use the heart to regulate the mind, thus bringing them both into alignment. The two entities unite in meditative togetherness, and we become integrated.

The cleaning method frees us from the various mental and emotional tendencies that often dominate our lives. Through it, we purify our hearts by removing inner heaviness, base qualities, and desires. Gradually, our authentic nature is revealed.

In prayer, we affirm our connection to the spiritual Source within. The act of prayer further evolves into a state of prayer­fulness, which beckons us to unite with that Source. It creates an aspiration and a craving that resolves itself in profound meditation.

The Heartfulness practice emerged in India in the early twentieth century. Its progenitor was a yogi named Ram Chandra, whom people called Lalaji. From the very beginning, Lalaji set a tone of inclusiveness, accepting students from any religious and social background, which was rare for his time and place. He himself was steeped in various traditions, which he synthesized and innovated to create a path that could serve an increasingly modernized humanity. Modern seekers have numerous responsibilities and are not equipped to devote themselves exclusively to their spiritual aspirations. Heartfulness proposes a balanced, integrated existence, where life’s spiritual and material wings can harmoniously coexist.

Lalaji’s spiritual successor was also named Ram Chandra, but was commonly known as Babuji. Babuji perfected the Heartfulness practice, bringing it into its present form and guiding seekers around the world. Babuji’s successor was Parthasarathi Rajagopalachari (Chariji), the third guide of the Heartfulness way. When Chariji passed away on December 20, 2014, Kamlesh became the fourth guide in the Heartfulness lineage.

It was my good fortune to have numerous interactions with Chariji when I relocated to India for work in 2008. When I first met him, I immediately remembered what the Zen master had foretold years earlier. However, I would later come to understand that “meeting the master” is something that happens within, rather than externally.

While living in India, I also met Kamlesh, who was my neighbor and the father of one of my friends. I quickly developed great respect and affection for him. He was one of the most authentic and down-­to-­earth individuals I had ever known. I remember one instance when his son remarked that one of our apartment complex’s security guards always seemed unhappy. “Maybe he would benefit from meditation,” he said to his father. Kamlesh replied, “Right now, that man needs bread more than he needs God.”

Kamlesh was born in the northwestern Indian state of Gujarat in 1956. He started Heartfulness practice in 1976, while a student at pharmacy college. After graduating, he moved to the United States and worked as a pharmacist in New York City while continuing his meditation practice. In 2011, Chariji formally nominated him as his spiritual successor, which came to fruition on the sad day of Chariji’s passing.

Since then, Kamlesh has completely devoted himself to his spiritual duties, which include guiding the activities of Heartfulness Institute and offering continuous support to seekers from every corner of the world. He eschews all formal titles, but many people refer to him as Daaji, which means “father’s younger brother” in his native Gujarati.

The Heartfulness Way is a series of candid conversations between Daaji and me, in which we explore the practice and principles of Heartfulness. In these conversations, I ask Daaji many questions. Some are questions that I had as a beginner in meditation. Others are questions that I have often been asked in my capacity as a Heartfulness trainer. Still others are questions that sprung naturally to my mind in the course of our discussions.

The Heartfulness Way consists of three parts. Part 1 examines the nature of the spiritual search, and demystifies meditation and yogic transmission.

Part 2 introduces the core practices of Heartfulness: meditation, cleaning, and prayer. It blends foundational knowledge and practical instruction. Each chapter concludes with a step-­by-­step guide to lead you through these simple practices. (There is also guided audio of three practices available for download at http://www.newharbinger.com/41344.)

Part 3 is a discussion about the guru’s invisible yet vital role in supporting our inner journey.

The Heartfulness Way is an invitation to experience the simple practice that has transformed my life and those of others practicing Heartfulness around the world. Of course, no book can ever transform us. A book may give us wisdom, but it cannot make us wise. A book can give us knowledge, but it cannot make us experience the truth of that knowledge. What this book offers is an experiential method that has helped many individuals discover that truth for themselves.

We may seek spirituality in various places, but the spiritual Source can never be found externally. It is a presence that can never be grasped, but only felt. When we do, it is with the heart that we feel it, for the heart is the organ of feeling. To practice Heartfulness is to seek the essence beyond the form. It is to seek the reality behind the ritual. It is to center oneself in the core of one’s heart and find true meaning and contentment there.

Daaji’s message to seekers is simple and direct: experience is greater than knowledge. Any good teacher understands this. That is why so many classes have both a lecture and a laboratory module. Daaji often says that in the lecture, you learn the principles, but in the lab, you experiment and gain practical experience. I invite you to make your own heart your lab and the practice of Heartfulness your experiment.

In any experiment, there is an experimenter, there is a subject to be experimented upon, and there is a result. In the spiritual experiment, all three roles belong to you. You are the experimenter, you are the subject of the experiment, and you are its result. With such an experiment, there is never any finality, but only an ongoing process of discovery. That is the joy and wonder of Heartfulness.

—Joshua Pollock

June 2018





Part 1





Why Heartfulness





1.





The Seeker’s Journey




E ntering Daaji’s apartment in Chennai, India, I found him relaxing on an indoor swing. As I walked toward him, a warm smile appeared on his face.

“What’s up, brother?” he said, extending his hand to shake mine. I sat across from him. A relative appeared from the next room and offered me tea. Daaji intervened.

“Give him coffee,” he said. “He’ll enjoy it more.” It was the truth.

The first thing people often notice about Daaji is his poise. It is a rare quality, which seems to touch anyone in his presence. His words are well placed and deliberate. Generally, he says only what is necessary to convey the bare essence. It then becomes incumbent upon the listener to further explore and expand the idea. Periods of silence often punctuate his speech. In such moments, a person can understand many things—­things that are even more important than his teachings. In this situation, a questioner tends to become inwardly content and forget all their questions. As Daaji’s interviewer, this was now my fear! However, I instead found a new dynamic emerging between us. Our conversation flowed unabated, and he answered every question enthusiastically and in great depth.

“So, you’re here with questions,” said Daaji.

“Yes, but I’ll start with just one,” I said. “Why meditate?”

“Why not?” he replied with a chuckle. “Well, each person’s reason will be different. In life, our goals tend to correspond to our personal needs and tastes. For instance, one person joins a gym in order to lose weight. Another person wants six-­pack abs. Yet both visit the same gym. I have observed a pattern in my interactions with meditators around the globe. Initially, people tend to approach meditative practice with a wide spectrum of aims. For example, many people suffer from a stressful lifestyle. They want to find a way to relax. Someone else wants to reduce blood pressure. Another person seeks mental clarity. Others want emotional balance. But when they start meditation, they soon begin to harvest benefits that far exceed these aims. Often, people are surprised to report a profound sense of spiritual wellbeing—­a state reflected by the presence of inner joy and even bliss. It is as if a hungry person asks for a small scrap of food, but then, someone surprises them with a banquet!

“What’s more, these results are palpable and immediate. We can experience them after a single meditation. In that case, what would happen if you meditated a second and a third time? Imagine the cumulative effect of numerous meditations!”

“But does meditation also address our original aims?” I asked.

“It addresses them without specifically targeting them,” he said. “Meditation simply normalizes your inner state, whatever it may be. A stressed person may meditate and say, ‘Meditation relaxes you.’ A person with disturbed emotions may meditate and say, ‘Meditation calms your emotions.’ An angry and bitter person may meditate and say, ‘Meditation opens your heart. It makes you loving.’

“Hearing these varied responses can confuse us! What does meditation actually do? we think to ourselves.”

“So what does it do?” I asked.

“It creates naturalness,” said Daaji. “As you proceed toward naturalness, that which is unnatural in you starts to disappear. There may be a thousand varieties of unnaturalness, but there is only one naturalness. Attaining that, we resolve a thousand complaints.

“Why meditate? The answer is complex because our goals change as we progress. Today’s reason is different from tomorrow’s. And that is as it should be! As we meditate, wisdom grows. We better understand what we are and what we should be. And meditation is the vehicle that takes us on this infinite journey.”

“If the journey is infinite, can we ever arrive?” I asked.

“Where?” he said with a laugh. “The moment you think, Yes, I have made it, you stop growing. You stop moving. Evolution can never stop. We must always be willing to change. We must be ready to go to the next step, whatever it may be. Then, having reached that step, we must be prepared and flexible enough to go even further.”

“But spiritual literature is replete with examples of figures who were supposedly perfect beings,” I said.

“Do you think they would describe themselves in such a way?” he asked. “In mathematics, there is something called an asymptote . It’s a line that is approached by a curve, which intersects the line at infinity. That curve moves infinitely closer to the line, but the two never meet. They only get closer and closer. A highly advanced aspirant is like that curve. She forever approaches the destination without ever arriving. At any given moment, she is both infinitely close and infinitely far from the goal. Yet, she keeps moving. As long as the aspirant exists, the journey will be infinite.”

“What are we moving toward?” I asked.

“From selfishness toward selflessness,” he said. “From the reactive mind to the responsive heart; from imprisonment in the folds of ego to freedom from ego; from the here and now to eternal, timeless existence; from worshipping forms to formlessness; from contraction to expansion; from restlessness to peacefulness; from the superficial to the authentic; from insistence to acceptance; from imbalance to balance; from darkness to light; from heaviness to lightness; from grossness to subtlety; from the periphery to the core of the Being, the Source, the Higher Self.

“You see, the purpose of meditation is to transform us. Transformation is the purpose of religion, too. It is also the purpose of self-­help and psychiatry. Yet, whenever we try to change ourselves in any way, we tend to encounter tremendous forces of inertia that prevent us from achieving our goals.

“Of course, there is a lot of help available. There is no lack of great teachings—­especially in this modern age! At the click of a mouse, we can access the wealth of nearly any tradition. We can view the latest scientific research on so many subjects. It’s the age of information. Yet, information can only do so much to help us.”

Daaji laughed and said, “I am reminded of an old couplet: ‘Worms ate up thousands of books but did not receive a certificate of erudition.’

“That’s what a bookworm is. No matter how much knowledge they gain, it doesn’t make them any wiser! Knowledge cannot change us, you see. For example, we all know that patience is a virtue, but is knowledge enough to make us patient? Similarly, we all know the value of love. The great teachers of the world have all spoken of it. However, to know about love and to feel and express it are entirely different matters!

“What do we learn from this? If teachings alone were sufficient, we would all be transformed by now. After all, many great personalities have come before us and left great teachings behind. Yet, the world remains as it is. Great teachings are not enough. Knowledge is not enough.

“You may believe in the omnipresence of God, for instance, but do you feel that constant presence in your life? If not, how does this belief help you? It may give you comfort, but being comforted by a belief is no substitute for experiencing the reality behind it.”

Just then, someone entered the room and called us for lunch.

“Come,” said Daaji. “Let’s eat.”

We sat at the table, but found that the food wasn’t ready. Apparently, there had been some miscommunication. Daaji laughed and said, “See, this is what I’m talking about. You can’t satisfy a person’s hunger with the promise of food. Neither can mere belief satiate a craving heart.”

Lunch arrived after a while, and we ate in silence. Then, Daaji spoke.

“Through meditation, we go within and connect with something higher. Therefore, we can find it wherever we are. We need not make pilgrimages. We need not change our dress, our habits, or our names. We need not do anything except close our eyes and sit quietly in meditation. That is how we gain practical spiritual experience.

“Experience is what differentiates spirituality from religion. Belief without experience is hollow. It’s too abstract. In worldly life, most people understand this. For instance, science classes have both a lecture and a lab component. In the lecture, you understand the principles, but it is in the lab that you see them in action. You become practically familiar with them. Your secondhand knowledge gains the backing of firsthand experience.

“In spiritual matters, however, people tend to be more conservative. They are uncomfortable with firsthand knowledge and rely on the teachings of others. However, a time comes when the heart demands personal experience. Knowledge cannot satisfy that demand. Belief cannot satisfy it. So, they embark upon a spiritual search. Please don’t mistake this as a criticism of religious belief. Religion is a foundation, but what is a foundation, anyway? We must build upon it. A religious teaching may be true, but it matters little unless you have realized that truth for yourself. You see, it is not enough for a teaching to be true. It must be true for you .

“Truth must be realized practically, and meditation is the means. When we lack practical experience, the various religions often appear to speak different languages. Then, we see only Christians, Buddhists, Hindus, Muslims, and so many others. In an effort to bridge the gaps, we may strive to learn about each religion. Yet, that knowledge can make them seem even more different from one another! We observe how Christians seek the kingdom of heaven, Buddhists strive for nirvana, Hindus pursue liberation and the state of Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahman), and Sufis strive for fana-­e-­fana (death of death) and baqua-­e-­baqua (life of life).

“Surely they can’t all speak of the same truth, we think. If one is right, the rest must be wrong.

“Now we argue. We fight about which God is the true God. We fight over which philosophy is the true philosophy. We debate the legitimacy of the founders. Some people get fed up and become atheists. They think that all the religions must be wrong!

“However, when you meditate and actually experience some of these states, you realize that they are all the same . You can no longer be exclusive. You can no longer claim that only your tradition is correct. Instead, you become inclusive and accepting of all perspectives. What is there to fight about?

“Therefore, I always suggest that whatever your tradition may be, please stay with it—­but meditate also . Meditation will help you go deeper and discover its essence. Then you find that all religions have the same essence. It’s like that famous line from the Rigveda : ‘The Reality is one; the learned speak of this in many ways.’”

Then Daaji made one of his characteristic U-­turns.

“Yet, as compelling as our meditative experiences are, they don’t always succeed in transforming us,” he said. “Our experiences may be profound. They may be highly enjoyable. Yet, personal experience rarely translates into personal change. Does a state of rapture automatically make us kind? Does ecstasy make us loving?” He shook his head.

“Then what is the point of experience?” I asked.

“Well, when you want a donkey to move, you have to show it some green grass,” he said, smiling.

“So it’s just a matter of incentive,” I said.

“If we didn’t have phenomenal experiences in meditation, I don’t think anybody would meditate,” he said. “Meditation transforms us, but we have to have a reason to keep meditating.”

“But I think our experiences do more than encourage us to keep going,” I said. “They also teach us something.”

“Yes, but that doesn’t mean that we learn from them!” Daaji retorted. “But through meditation, we do change. You see, meditative practice works at deeper levels of our being. Knowledge and experience only work at the conscious level. That is not enough. Our thoughts, attitudes, emotions, and habits have roots in the infinite vastness of the subconscious. What’s more, our subliminal thoughts are more powerful than the thoughts we consciously entertain. This is one of the reasons that we fail when restricting our efforts at change to the conscious level. We can change deliberate actions, but how to change subconscious action? When we are barely even aware of something, can we change it? This is our biggest hurdle when trying to affect meaningful change in our lives. A true change agent cannot work at the superficial level alone, but must be effective at all levels of our being. It must be holistic.

“A sound meditative practice fills that gap in our efforts. It works at the deepest levels, activating the dormant evolutionary forces within and propelling us on an evolutionary path. Then, change happens on its own.

“Often, it happens in spite of us! We do not know why we feel so happy. We don’t know why we feel so light. Our family, friends, and colleagues take notice. In fact, we now become a transformational presence in their lives as well. we breathe love. we walk love. we talk and live love.

“You see, we’re talking about how knowledge and experience both fail us. However, with the added practical element of meditation, they both become extremely useful.”

“Because the knowledge we gain through meditation comes firsthand?” I asked.

“Of course,” said Daaji. “But meditation also converts secondhand knowledge into something useful. When reading spiritual literature, for instance, we now find that it resonates with our own experience. It also clarifies our experience. Then, it can pull us up to a higher level of understanding.

“With practice, we also start to learn from our experiences. Previously, we unconsciously resisted change, and our experiences went to waste. But over time, meditative practice wipes that inner resistance away. Like a horse that runs at the shadow of a whip, all we need now is the mere hint of an experience. That’s enough to trigger an inner change. We become like an object in outer space, where you only need to give it a tap, and it keeps going and going. There’s no resistance, you see. Our experiences now have the same effect. They only need to tap you, and you become ennobled.”

“What are our experiences really trying to tell us?” I asked.

“Experiences reflect our inner nature,” said Daaji. “For instance, when I’m angry, I have a negative experience. That anger prevents me from having the kind of experiences that I would prefer to have. When I’m jealous, there is another negative experience. But when I’m loving and generous, it’s a beautiful experience. And the intensity of that beauty depends upon the extent of my love and generosity.”

“So they show you which direction to move in?” I asked.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “They are indicators. When I am like this , my experience will be like that . When I am like that , my experience will be like this . And due to certain meditative practices, I am able to change as a result of this understanding.”

“So really, the role of experience hasn’t changed much from what it was before we meditated,” I said. “It is still like the green grass one shows to the donkey because its role is to encourage us in a certain direction.”

“Yes,” said Daaji. “But now, experience becomes effective because you’ve removed the donkey’s stubbornness!”

“Our inner resistance,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “And a time comes when there is no more donkey, either. You see, I eventually realize that there is one single factor that affects all my experiences: the way I handle my ego. The higher my egotism, the worse my experience is. The more humble and insignificant I am, the better my experience is. It’s a simple formula! Then, one day, a light bulb goes on in my head: How would it be if I were to become a total zero—­if I were to become nothing ?”

“And meditation facilitates this, too,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “Now, the only kind of change that I find in myself pertains to whether there is more of me or less of me. Conversely, we can ask the question of whether there is more of God or less of God. You see, the more I am there, the less He is there, and the less of me there is, the more His presence manifests. It now becomes a question of being and nonbeing.”

“Ah, that’s what you meant about the donkey disappearing!” I said.

Daaji nodded.

“When I am dissolved in the Ultimate Source, it is absolute bliss,” he continued. “Rather, I become bliss. And when I become bliss, how can I experience it? It’s like a raindrop that falls into the ocean. There is no more drop. It has become the ocean, you see.

“That’s why mystical traditions fall silent in the end. They cannot express the final state, which is so sublime and perfect and balanced.

“And could a person who has attained this state ever be selfish? Could they be violent? The world faces many challenges. Some are political, others are social. Some are economic, others are environmental. In all cases, humanity suffers. But the world’s problems are very simple. They are the lack of love between human beings, the lack of compassion, of tolerance, of humility, and of acceptance. They are the arrogance, hatred, and violence that have polluted human hearts. They are prejudice and intolerance. If a person has no peace in their heart, there can be no peace around them. Such a person will always find reasons to argue and fight. Only when a person’s own heart is peaceful can their interactions be peaceful.

“How to solve the problem of hatred? Is there any political solution? Can love and acceptance be legislated and enforced? Can any law change the human heart? The heart only changes when it decides to change. And that is a personal choice that every person must make for themselves. We cannot enforce it upon them. We can only inspire them and offer them the tools.

“Therefore, rather than trying to transform others, let us devote ourselves to our own transformation. As for others, let us be nondemanding of them. Let us be content to love them as they are, to accept them as they are, and to be ever ready to serve them as we would the members of our own family. This is the humanity that the world sorely needs.

“Only love can make it possible to accept another person’s flaws. Have you ever seen a mother give up on her children? Even if her child constantly misbehaves, getting thrown out of school or worse, the mother remains by their side, even after everyone else is fed up. This is due to the mother’s love. Where there is love, there is acceptance. Where there is love, there is forgiveness. Where there is love, there is compassion. Love is the root of every noble quality. Therefore, when there is love, do you need any other quality? When love is present, acceptance, forgiveness, and compassion all become redundant. Love alone is sufficient. No other quality is required. We all know this. The great teachers of the past and present have all said so. But if teachings were enough, wouldn’t we be transformed by now?”





2.





Demystifying Meditation




T he practice of meditation forms an integral part of many contemplative traditions. It is said to be the most effective way to approach Divinity, transcending both ritual and belief. Rituals, the actions we undertake at the physical level of existence, remain at the physical level. Belief remains at the mental level. To transcend both and arrive at a spiritual state of being, we must take the help of something that belongs to the higher, spiritual level of existence. This is the approach we take in Heartfulness meditation. To better understand it, I decided to start at the beginning.

“What is meditation?” I asked Daaji.

He took out his pen and drew a diagram.

“The vertical axis represents a spectrum between the focused mind and the unfocused mind,” he said. “A focused mind settles on one thought and remains there. It is single-­pointed. Conversely, the unfocused mind wanders from topic to topic. It thinks many thoughts, and its attention jumps here and there. Between these two extremes, there is a middle ground. Most of the mind’s activity occurs there, in that middle ground.



“Here is another polarity: effort and effortlessness. That’s the horizontal axis. The effortless mind is relaxed and at ease. On the other side is the effortful mind, which cannot be at ease. It struggles to think, to comprehend, and to concentrate.

“Different combinations of these two spectrums result in certain states of mind. Here, we have daydreaming, frustration, concentration, and meditation. Let’s understand the meditative mind. As you can see, it is a mixture of focus and effortlessness. It is to be immersed in one thought, but effortlessly so.”

“Can it be any thought?” I asked.

“Yes,” said Daaji.

“But in that case, everybody already meditates!” I said.

“That’s what I’m saying,” said Daaji, with a chuckle. “There is no question of having to learn a new skill. We all know how to meditate. We do it every day.

“For example, a businessman meditates upon a business venture. As he drives his car, he meditates upon that. As he goes to sleep at night, he meditates upon it. Perhaps someone is in love with him. As she goes through her routine, she meditates upon him. As she brushes her teeth, she meditates upon him. She goes to the grocery store, but she meditates upon him the whole time. Meanwhile, she passes a musician in the store. His mind is busy thinking of music. He also meditates. There is even a term called premeditated murder, where the perpetrator meditates on how to perfectly execute his dark plans!”

“If everybody already meditates, then what’s so profound about meditation?” I asked.

“What makes it profound is the idea that we explore through meditation,” said Daaji. “That idea is our object of meditation.

“Our object of meditation makes all the difference. A profound object gives us a profound consciousness. A mundane object gives us a mundane consciousness. A temporary object makes our meditative state of mind temporary. A profound, changeless object makes our meditation permanent. Different objects create different effects, you see.”

“How can we achieve a meditative state that is both permanent and profound?” I asked.

“Effortless focus upon a profound object,” said Daaji. “For that, we must practice. Without a mother, there can be no baby, and without the practice of meditation, there is no meditative state.”

“I have found that new aspirants are often nervous about trying meditation,” I said. “They think they will have trouble handling their thoughts.”

“Many say that the mind’s nature is to be restless,” said Daaji. “They say that its natural state is one of disturbance. I disagree. In fact, I would like to dispel that notion.”

“Why is the idea of difficulty so entrenched?” I asked him.

“Many established teachers have espoused this view,” said Daaji. “In my opinion, they perform a disservice to the cause. If you believe the mind to be inherently unstable, it becomes your enemy. And what do you do with enemies?”

“You fight them,” I answered.

“And so meditation becomes a battle,” he said. “It becomes an exercise in suppressing the mind. But have your thoughts and emotions ever prevented you from enjoying a good film?”

“No,” I said.

“Have they ever stopped you from enjoying a delicious meal?”

“No again,” I said.

“And why not?” he pressed.

“A film draws your attention,” I said. “A good meal draws your attention. Then, you don’t notice such things.”

“Exactly,” said Daaji. “When something draws your attention and holds it there, you become unmindful of unwanted thoughts. You only need to give your mind something to sink its teeth into—­something really absorbing. Then you will observe just how naturally it stabilizes, how effortlessly it focuses.

“However, we do not seem to have much control over this. Some objects attract the mind, and some simply do not! For example, if your child has been deeply absorbed in his studies all day, you might feel happy. He is engaged in a positive activity. But if you realize that he has been playing video games for nine hours straight, you might start to worry. In both cases, your child exhibits an enormous capacity to focus. But your concern is the object upon which he is focused. You are concerned about where his interests lie.

“You see, we do not suffer from an inability to focus. We focus effortlessly upon our interests. But can we choose our interests? It seems that certain objects simply appeal to us more than others. The reason is the impressions that we carry in our consciousness—­but we will explore that topic another time. Anyway, when something appeals to you, you become almost enraptured. You are totally focused. It is only when an object does not interest you that you must make efforts to concentrate.

“For instance, what happens when you read a book on a subject that does not speak to your heart? Your mind wanders every second sentence, right? Eventually, you realize that you have no idea what you have just read. You scan back in the text until things start to look familiar. To finish the book, you really have to concentrate!”

“Interest succeeds where force does not,” I said.

“Right,” said Daaji. “If you have keen interest in a project, you will certainly succeed. If you are not interested, you struggle. Without interest, any activity becomes a drag. Unless the mind finds an idea attractive, it is averse to staying on that topic. It would rather focus on something else.”

“Concentration and focus are not the same thing, are they?” I remarked.

“True focus is effortless,” he replied. “It happens naturally. It is only when it doesn’t happen on its own that we have to make efforts. That is what concentration is—­the attempt to focus.

“We define meditation as thinking about one thing continuously. Therefore, many people mistake it for concentration. But meditation is not concentration. Concentration is forceful, while meditation is effortless, involving no force at all.

“In concentration, you have to marshal your mind. You focus on a single idea to the exclusion of all the other ideas that you would prefer to be thinking about! The more deeply you concentrate, the more exclusive your awareness becomes. At its highest pitch, your entire awareness focuses on a single point, excluding all else.

“This requires effort! It is not easy to arrest the flow of thoughts. The mind has a natural momentum. It wants to go in a certain direction, but you are forcing it to go elsewhere. It is like trying to divert a rushing river. Even if you do manage to wrestle your mind into submission, you then have to hold it there! The moment you relax your efforts, it bounces back, like a tightly coiled spring. How long can you maintain such intensity of effort?”

“Even though some people equate meditation with concentration, they also say that meditation should be relaxing,” I said. “They say that it should give us peace.”

“Can meditation be relaxing or peaceful when we are applying so much effort to concentrate?” asked Daaji. “So let us forget about concentration. For worldly matters, it may be necessary, but it fails entirely in the spiritual realm.”

“But we define meditation as a state of focus,” I reminded him.

“Effortless focus,” Daaji corrected. “In such a state, your mind naturally settles on one thought. This happens by itself, when an object is able to attract and hold your attention. When your attention is thus harnessed, you are in a state known as absorption . That is another word for the meditative state of mind.

“However, ‘attraction’ is double-­edged! It is another word for desire, you see.”

“What is desire, really?” I asked.

“Desire is the soul’s misdirected urge for completion,” said Daaji. “The soul craves union with its original Source. That is the real desire—­the big desire! Until we know where to look, we tend to seek fulfillment externally instead.

“I’ll tell you a story. One day, an ant was crawling along a leaf, when a sparrow landed next to her. ‘What amazing sights you must see when you fly so high in the sky,’ sighed the ant. ‘I only ever see twigs and leaves and pebbles. Please tell me what you see from up there.’

“‘Well,’ said the sparrow, ‘I can see the whole forest in a single glance, and in the distance, I can even see the ocean.’

“‘What is the ocean?’ asked the ant.

“‘In the ocean, there is so much water that it has no end,’ said the sparrow.

“The ant had only ever seen raindrops and droplets of dew.

“I would like to see this ocean! thought the ant. ‘Which direction is the ocean?’ she asked the sparrow.

“‘Oh, it is that way,’ said the sparrow, pointing his wing.

“‘Thank you,’ said the ant, and she set off. She walked for hours and hours. Finally, she encountered a mud puddle. The ant looked to see if she could see the other side, but as far as she could see, there was only water.

“‘At last, I have reached the ocean!’ said the ant.

“That is the situation in which we find ourselves,” laughed Daaji. “We mistake the ephemeral for the eternal, the finite for the infinite, the mud puddle for the infinite ocean. We seek fulfillment in various objects. However, the satisfaction we derive is limited and temporary. Really, it makes us feel even emptier inside. This is because we lack contact with our inner Source of contentment. Without such contact, we have little choice but to try to fulfill that deeper need in other ways.

“For instance, suppose that your daughter is crying on a long car trip. Then you pass by an ice cream parlor and think, This will stop her from crying. You stop and get her ice cream, and she is happy. She is totally and effortlessly absorbed in the ice cream cone. Her mind settles. Really, she is in a state of meditation. The ice cream solves the problem of her dissatisfaction, but it is only a fleeting solution, you see. Afterward, you will have to find a new way to keep her mind occupied. Furthermore, you have conditioned her mind. You have offered ice cream as a solution for its restlessness. Now, she will be more likely to ask for ice cream the next time she feels unsettled. She will certainly request it on your next drive, even if it is a very short one.”

“So, no more ice cream, I guess,” I said.

“No, no, she will never forgive me!” said Daaji.

But I was referring to myself.

“With a limited object of meditation, your meditation provides only limited fulfillment,” he continued. “With a temporary object of meditation, your fulfillment is temporary. Afterward, you become restless all over again. If you really enjoy your state of absorption, you also seek its repetition.

“In so doing, you create a cycle of fulfillment and lack. If you like ice cream, your mind gravitates toward it. If you prefer whiskey, your mind goes that way instead. Your mind pursues whatever attracts it. Then, we become caught in a cycle of desire and fulfillment. Until we fulfill that desire, we are unstable and restless. After fulfilling it, we again become unstable and restless. We become like pendulums, swinging between lack and fleeting happiness. The more desires we have, the more difficult they are to fulfill. Even when we feel fulfilled in one area, we remain unsatisfied in other ways.

“Furthermore, whenever we don’t get what we have become conditioned to require, we become even more unhappy and unfulfilled than we were before. Our mental stability now depends upon the fulfillment of these desires, so we become insistent. ‘I must have this new car!’ you say, and it’s true. For the sake of your mental stability, you must have it. You have trained yourself to be restless without it, to be unhappy without it. That is the first problem. The second problem is that by repeatedly fulfilling a particular desire, you develop tolerance to that fulfillment.

“One day, I discovered that one of the pharmacists I employed was addicted to a certain drug. He took doses that would make a normal man collapse, but he was still on his feet, working. He had developed a tolerance to the effects of the drug. With repeated fulfillment of a desire, our dependence increases, but so does our tolerance. We depend more and more upon its fulfillment while deriving less and less satisfaction from it. As a result, we become even more unsettled and dissatisfied.

“What the mind truly craves is permanence. It is not happy with limitation. It is not content with temporary states of happiness. It seeks infinity , a fulfillment to end all fulfillments. It seeks to fulfill that desire which, when fulfilled, marks the end of all desire. In short, the mind seeks not merely meditation, but endlessness in meditation. That is true meditation, profound meditation.

“So there is nothing wrong with desire,” Daaji continued, “but fulfill your real desire. Fulfill the big one. Just as a big fish swallows up the smaller fish, the biggest desire subsumes the smaller ones. In that perfect fulfillment, we attain perfect peace.”

“You’re talking about desire and attraction,” I said. “However, many of the thoughts and emotions to which our minds seem to gravitate are not pleasant.”

“That’s true,” said Daaji. “Attraction does not mean that we like something. Not at all. Rather, it means that the mind gravitates toward it—­whether we want it to or not. You see, the other side of desire is fear—­aversion, revulsion. For instance, we want to live, and we fear death. They are two sides of the same coin. And as much as we tend to focus on what we want, we also brood over what we do not want. At times, the mind meditates on the positive, and at other times, it gets absorbed in the negative.

“On the negative side, the mind may gravitate toward a discomforting thought, a painful memory, or a difficult emotion. It can even be physical pain. These mental objects are like whirlpools, sucking our attention toward them.

“In fact, all the objects that draw our attention are like whirlpools. It doesn’t matter if we feel positive or negative about them. We may try to swim away from them, but we swim against heavy currents. When we are so focused on the thing we want to escape from, its attraction actually becomes stronger. The power of a thought grows to the extent that we give it our attention, you see.

“For instance, a boy sees a girl and goes crazy over her. His mind zeroes in on her. He can’t stop thinking about her, and he is also happy to think about her. But what if he is already a married man?”

“Then he’s in trouble,” I said.

“The thought of that girl is like a whirlpool. He is inexorably drawn in her direction. Yet, he knows that he cannot allow himself such an indulgence. So, with great effort, he battles the current of his attraction. His mind wants to settle on the thought of her. It is trying to settle, but it is settling on the wrong thing.

“We often become trapped in loops of thought that are not useful to our lives or the lives of others. In fact, these loops of thought can become destructive forces in our lives. Therefore, we have to regulate the mind. We achieve this by practicing meditation. And we must practice in such a way that our minds are naturally attracted toward a useful object—­a transformational object. That is the benefit that a sound method can confer. The way meditation regulates the mind is by orienting it toward the ultimate Source of contentment.”

“So the object of meditation is extremely important,” I commented.

“Yes, the object determines the effect that our meditation will have upon us,” he said. “Whether you drink water or whiskey, the act of drinking is the same. The effect is only different because the object is different. Similarly, no matter which object you meditate upon, the act of meditation is the same. It’s just that different objects lead to different outcomes. A limited object produces a limited effect. What sort of effect would an unlimited object produce? The idea baffles the mind, but it does not baffle the heart. The heart is intuitive. It does not share the mind’s many limitations.”

“What is the unlimited object?” I asked.

“The Source,” said Daaji. “It is Divinity itself—­the original wellspring. To seek Divinity with the mind is to seek it externally. Then, it becomes too cerebral, too abstract. If we try to concentrate, we find nothing upon which to concentrate. If we try to grasp it, it eludes us. It is something that must be found within. When its refreshing breeze first reaches us, it comes through feeling.

“Thinking is narrow, but feeling is broad. It is holistic. It encompasses thinking, but it is beyond thinking. It encompasses all our faculties, but it is beyond them, too. Through feeling, deeper truths are revealed. Divinity cannot be known, you see, but its presence can be felt.

“And can you feel that presence with your liver or in your heels? Can you feel it with your shoulders or your elbows? The heart is the organ of feeling, and so it is with the heart that we feel it. Therefore, the heart is where we must seek it, and this is why we meditate upon the heart. Here ends our journey in the realm of knowledge, concepts, and forms.”

“How does meditation help us realize this inner presence?” I asked. “How does it help us unite with it?”

“This is explained well in Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras ,” said Daaji.



The Yoga Sutras , often attributed to the sage Patanjali, are an ancient teaching that elucidates certain foundational principles of yoga. Although many people associate the term “yoga” with a set of physical exercises, that is only one branch of yoga. Yoga is also a meditative approach, the purpose of which is to unite the individual with the universal Source. This aspect of yoga is the subject of the Yoga Sutras, in which Patanjali presents a path consisting of eight parts, or steps, known collectively as ashtanga yoga. The eight steps are:

Yama



Niyama



Asana



Pranayama



Pratyahara



Dharana



Dhyana



Samadhi





“All eight steps of the Yoga Sutras are important,” said Daaji, “and we’ll discuss each of them in due course. For now, though, I would like to focus on the last four steps: pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi. These four steps describe the process by which we enter into the depths of meditation. The steps are distinct from one another, but they are not separate. Rather, they flow into one another. They are four aspects of a single movement—­a journey into the depths of our being.

“Let’s start with the fifth step, which is pratyahara. Pratyahara means ‘self-­withdrawal.’ It is to turn inward, to withdraw ourselves from the many distractions that surround us and center ourselves within. Most of the time, our focus is external. Our awareness is generally limited to whatever we can perceive through the five senses. We hear, we see, we touch, we smell, we taste, and that’s about it. There is nothing wrong with this external orientation. It is vital to our survival. Our senses are a navigation system, you see. They help us secure life’s basic necessities: food, shelter, clothing, et cetera.

“However, we tend to go overboard with this material aspect of life. We may achieve material abundance. We may receive the love and admiration of others. But such things cannot fulfill us at the deepest levels. They cannot truly satisfy the heart. No matter how much we achieve or acquire, we still find that we lack something essential. Eventually, we realize that fulfilling our material desires does not make us fulfilled. The heart pines for something else entirely—­something far deeper.”

“You spoke about this already,” I said. “You mentioned the soul’s urge for completion, the urge to unite with its Source.”

“Yes,” said Daaji. “But that concept is too intellectual. It’s too abstract to resonate with our hearts. That fundamental urge for union is something that we must discover in ourselves. Until we do, it generally gets misdirected, and we continue to hunt inner fulfillment on the material plane. Our search remains external, and we remain preoccupied with acquiring and consuming things.

“We easily become addicted to constant intake, to constant stimulus. For example, you see so many people checking their smartphones every few seconds! In meditation, we temporarily withdraw ourselves from such things. We take a break from the constant movement of life. We turn away from its enticements, its anxieties, and its stresses. In other words, we stop searching outside ourselves. That is pratyahara. In pratyahara, we go within. The Bhagavad Gita provides us with an instructive image: ‘When the yogi withdraws his senses from their objects, just like the turtle withdrawing its limbs from all directions, his consciousness is well established.’ We become centered within, you see.

“If you want to understand pratyahara even further, examine its Sanskrit etymology. We form the word ‘pratyahara’ from two Sanskrit roots: prati and ahar. Prati means ‘against,’ and ahar means ‘intake.’ In pratyahara, we stop searching externally for things to consume. By going within, by settling ourselves in the center of our being, we defeat the desire for constant stimulation, for constant intake. We become so content that we just forget it.”

“How do we achieve this?” I asked.

“Something has to draw us inward,” said Daaji. “This cannot be achieved by force. Otherwise, we end up struggling. You see, what often happens is that a person closes their eyes and tries to meditate, but they don’t find anything inside. It is as if the heart is locked up—­totally inaccessible. After a few minutes of trying, they are frustrated. ‘I don’t feel anything!’ they say. Then they give up. Or, they persevere and force themselves to concentrate on the heart. But then, they are not really meditating. It is only concentration, which is not the same thing.”

“Why don’t we find anything when we look inside?” I asked.

“We haven’t developed the inner senses that would allow us to perceive anything on that subtle level,” said Daaji. “We are like a blind person attempting to recognize the color red. Divinity is already within us, but we don’t recognize it. We do not feel it. Therefore, it has no effect upon us.”

“How do we rise beyond this limitation?” I asked.

“In the Heartfulness approach, our meditation is aided by yogic transmission,” said Daaji. “That makes all the difference. The topic of yogic transmission is a vast one, so let us wait and explore it in greater depth later on—­including the way to experience it for ourselves. For now, let us understand that transmission is a catalyst for profound meditation. It allows us to experience Divinity—­rather than only believing in it. By infusing us with divine experience, transmission helps us transcend the need for belief. When you experience something for yourself, belief is no longer relevant, you see. Therefore, transmission is a means by which we can awaken to reality, to the essential presence within. As a result, meditation now becomes a joyful, living affair. No longer is it just a dry exercise. No longer do we spend meditation fighting with thoughts and bodily sensations.

“Further on, yogic transmission helps us merge with that inner presence and become almost identical to it. You see, transmission is Divinity itself, coming to your door with an invitation in hand. Like the scent of a rose beckoning us toward the garden, the fragrance of Divinity draws us in. It is so mesmerizing and captivating! It speaks to our hearts and draws us further into itself—­further into ourselves . This paves our way to deeper levels of meditation. It happens so naturally that we hardly have to expend any effort. That is why Babuji [the second guru in the Heartfulness tradition] called this Heartfulness path ‘the natural path,’ or Sahaj Marg. It is a natural and forceless approach.

“Now, having been drawn inward, we arrive at the sixth step in Patanjali’s progression, which is dharana. Patanjali describes dharana as ‘arresting other things.’ This means that during meditation, you are undistracted. You will still hear the traffic noises coming from outside. You’ll still be aware that someone is in the next room talking loudly on the phone. Yet you are unaffected by these inputs. They do not disturb you. Their impact is arrested .

“However, as a result of Patanjali’s definition, people generally mistake dharana for a state of intense concentration. Let’s examine its etymology. Dharana stems from the Sanskrit root dhar, which means ‘something that holds,’ or ‘something that contains.’ So, like a tiny fetus that is held and supported in its mother’s womb, we are also held and supported. Where? In the womb of the heart. When we are totally at rest in the heart, something special happens—­something sacred, actually. In nature, seeds germinate in the womb of Mother Earth because of the comfort they find there. In this comfort, they split open and shed their protective layer. Why? Because they sense the protection of the Earth surrounding them. When we experience that same level of comfort and protection in the womb of the heart, the divine seed starts to open, and from that seed, a new spiritual life gradually emerges. We now start to experience a completely new spectrum of consciousness.

“In this situation, we experience profound rest. We experience comfort beyond description. When we are so restful, can the mind still be restless? Can our emotions create havoc within us? Everything now settles down, and we become content.

“You see, we do not have to hold the object of meditation in our minds, as people so often believe. That would be very tiresome. Rather, the object of meditation holds us .

“Patanjali’s next step is dhyana, which is ‘to hold the mind on one object.’ But when the mind is at rest, we don’t need to hold it in place. It is already in place. It is simply balanced there.”

“So dharana and dhyana are really describing one and the same condition,” I said.

“That’s right,” said Daaji. “There is no difference between an undistracted mind and a settled mind. They are indistin-

guishable.

“And let us not mistake a restful mind for a sluggish mind. No, in this state, our awareness becomes dynamic. Consciousness steeps in the divine presence within. We are totally absorbed in it. When our level of absorption passes a certain threshold, we call it ‘samadhi,’ which is the eighth and final step in Patanjali’s progression.

“Because samadhi is the last of these eight steps, people commonly think of it as the grand culmination of the spiritual journey. In actuality, samadhi is only the beginning. Much, much more lies beyond. Actually, many of us have a taste of samadhi even on our very first day of meditation, just as you did on yours. Our experience of samadhi deepens and changes as we progress, you see.

“Samadhi is deep meditation. It is to be deeply absorbed in the divine object. Then we start to unite with that divine presence within. Eventually, we become one. However, total union does not happen all at once. It is a progressive thing. You see, with each successive meditation, it can be possible to merge a little further. And along with each tiny union, we experience a sense of completion that is unmatched by anything we have previously experienced. Our hearts become drenched in peace and contentment. When such is the case, could anything possibly disturb us? Could we still feel stressed or unbalanced? The mind is only at ease when the heart is at peace.

“Yet, many regard meditation as a state of mere mental inactivity—­of thoughtlessness. Not many have understood that the roots of inner stillness lie in that state of union. People often take mental stillness as a goal in and of itself, without realizing the cause of that stillness. Believing that meditation is an exercise in suppressing thoughts, they devise various artificial means to induce the state of thoughtlessness. There are certainly points on the body, which if concentrated upon, do provide thoughtlessness. (That is the reason that some people meditate on the tip of the nose.) However, thoughtlessness without union is only a state of ignorance—­of mental dullness—­and not of any use. That is not samadhi.

“Let us now examine the word itself. ‘Samadhi’ is a combi­nation of two Sanskrit roots that mean ‘equal’ and ‘original.’ Sama means ‘equal,’ and aadi means ‘original.’ So in samadhi, we enter into a state that is equal to the original state, which is the state that prevailed before we came into existence. At that time, nothing yet existed apart from the Source from which we emerged. In that state, there was perfect calm and perfect balance.

“In fact, sama not only means ‘equal,’ as I just described, but it can also mean ‘balance.’ Therefore, we can also translate samadhi as ‘original balance.’”

“So samadhi is a state that is equal to our original state, which was a state of balance,” I said.

“Exactly,” said Daaji. “There is even a third way to form the word ‘samadhi.’ Combine sama, meaning ‘balance,’ with aadhi, which means ‘mental disturbance.’ According to this combination, samadhi also means ‘balancing mental disturbance.’ This is a revealing description! In samadhi, the disturbed mind reverts to its original balanced nature. Balance is intrinsic to the mind. Disturbance is artificial. It came later on. It is something we created.”

“And we continue to create it,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “Disturbance depends on our efforts, but balance doesn’t depend on anything at all. When you leave things alone, they become balanced by themselves. A pond only gets ripples when something disturbs it. On its own, it is placid.”

“So we cannot create balance,” I said.

“And neither can we create samadhi,” Daaji replied. “We meditate, and samadhi comes on its own. It is what remains after everything else has settled down. This is meditation: effortless focus upon the infinite object .

“With a limited object, your awareness is limited. Many people recite mantras, for instance. But by repeating a single word over and over again, they only straightjacket their minds. They confine their awareness to the narrow perimeter of the word they are repeating. Focusing on a limited idea, your awareness is single-­pointed. When your awareness is single-­pointed, you miss out on everything except for that single point. You are like a horse wearing blinders in that you see the object in front of you and nothing else. Your awareness is confined.”

“What happens when your object is unlimited ?” I asked.

“With an unlimited object,” said Daaji, “your exclusive awareness encompasses the limitless totality of existence. Everything is included in such an awareness. Nothing can escape it. But does this mean that you are simultaneously aware of each person in the world, of every dog and cow, of every particle in the universe? No! The awareness we gain in meditation is not an awareness of diversity in its various forms. Rather, it is of oneness. It is an awareness of the Whole, of the Totality. If the Whole has any quality at all, it is Being. It is pure presence, pure existence.”

“And we are also a part of That,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “You cannot be separate from it. It is not as if you stand upon some mountaintop, gazing down at the infinite! Rather, you become it. Your situation now recalls the old Vedic pronouncement, Tat Tvam Asi : ‘That Thou Art.’ And it is the truth! You are That . But you will not realize this.”

“Why not?” I asked.

“Because in the infinite, you have melted away,” said Daaji. “You are no longer there. And if you are no longer there, who will perceive this truth? Now, the knower dissolves in knowing. The drop merges in the ocean.”

Daaji paused.

“But that is not the end. No, it is only a beginning … ”





Attitude


One afternoon, I meditated alone with Daaji. Afterward, he remarked, “Meditation isn’t everything.”

“What do you mean?” I asked.

“Spiritual practice is important,” he said. “Without it, transformation is only a dream. Yet, even the most effective meditation method, combined with the most disciplined approach, can only take us about 5 percent of the way.”

“And the other 95 percent?” I said.

“Attitude,” said Daaji. “What we do is important,” he said, “but it’s not as important as the attitude with which we do it. This doesn’t only apply to meditation. With any activity, it’s our attitude that defines it and our attitude that determines its success. If you meditate in a negative mood, it is counterproductive. Your negativity becomes the object of your meditation, you see. Your eyes may be closed. You may look as if you’re in meditation, but in actuality, you’re just brooding over your negative thoughts and feelings. That becomes your focus. And what happens if you meditate on your bad mood?”

“It only intensifies,” I said.

“The purpose of meditation is to enter into the finest states of consciousness,” he continued. “Do you think that will be possible if you bring heaviness, discord, and torments along with you? We have to leave them all behind. Such things weigh us down like lead, but they are easily removed with the cleaning method.

“There are also other attitudes that hinder us in subtler ways. Expectation is one of them. You see, many approach meditation with the expectation of a certain result. Suppose that one day, you had a phenomenal experience in meditation. The next time you meditate, you want to relive that experience. In so doing, you apply a condition to your meditation. ‘I must feel peaceful today!’ Something better might be waiting for you, yet you only want peace. So you miss out.

“This shows how even the best experiences can become traps. We have the tendency to get stuck on our experiences. Rather, we should always be willing to go beyond, to go further. Even at the high stage where bliss finally dawns, you must keep moving. Otherwise, your desire to remain in that state of bliss holds you back. You like it so much that you want to repeat it again and again. You don’t want to transcend it. Be assured that whatever you may experience, there is always something beyond it.

“We should also avoid the opposite extreme, which is impatience for the next stage to come. We needn’t be in any rush to keep moving. This attitude also holds us back.”

“I guess it’s a fine line between getting stuck on an experience and being in a hurry,” I said.

“No, not at all,” said Daaji. “It’s a simple thing. Just let the process unfold naturally, with total openness. Don’t place any conditions upon it. Don’t insist on anything and don’t demand anything. Meditation is best when we have no expectations—­not even for meditative experience! If something happens, fine. If you have no experience, it’s still okay.

“Really, meditation is a form of waiting. Not impatiently, as if you are pacing back and forth waiting for the bus. It’s a relaxed kind of waiting. You are at ease. You are comfortable. It does no good to be impatient, you see. Everything happens in its own time. For example, you cannot cut open a butterfly’s cocoon before it’s fully matured. That would kill the butterfly. Similarly, we cannot expect spiritual states to bloom before their time. They will come!”

“Sometimes, we have unpleasant experiences,” I said. “What then?”

“Many things happen in meditation,” said Daaji. “But every experience is ultimately good because each experience has a purpose—­even if we don’t understand what it is. We need not understand it either. Our understanding is not necessary for us to keep moving. Just take your experiences lightly and move on. Most of us do not understand the intricacies of the spiritual journey. Even if we have a vague idea of the destination, we still don’t know all the stages that come along the way. Stages are innumerable! Sometimes, the road appears to go backward. Sometimes, there is no road. Yet, we are moving forward in our journey through consciousness. So experiences can be deceptive. For instance, we previously spoke about samadhi.”

“Deep meditation,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “But not every meditation ends in samadhi. Some days, there will be no depth. Some days, our meditative experience is too mundane for our liking. Then we worry that something has gone wrong. This shows our unfamiliarity with the path. In many cases, there is a good reason for an uncomfortable meditation. We go through periods of discomfort from time to time. The biggest reason is that we have taken a quantum leap in our journey—­we have taken a big step forward. Some inner transformation has taken place, and we now have to get used to our new state.”

“What do you mean?” I asked.

“It’s like moving into a new apartment,” said Daaji. “You walk into a room and fumble for the light switch on the left side, but now it is on the right. It takes time to get used to your new surroundings. The best approach is to refrain from judging our meditative experiences and the states of being that they create in us. Instead, be like a passenger on a train, simply observing the passing scenery.

“On this journey, many scenes do pass by our window. We already spoke about how our experiences reflect our inner state, how our anger and ego give us bad experiences and how our kindness and humility give us blissful experiences. But there is a far deeper nature that we all share—­a divine nature. That is our hidden nature. And it is a changeless nature, too. As we progress, our outer nature slowly evolves to match that changeless, innermost nature. Until we become identical with that changeless state, we have to undergo constant change. We have to move through so many conditions of being before we reach that fundamental state. All the while, we have experiences that reflect these inner changes. Change can be tumultuous because there is no stability in change. Even though these changes are positive and reflect more overall balance in our personality, they still take a little getting used to. And a certain amount of restlessness will continue to remain within us until we reach the changeless state.

“Somewhere along the way, in the midst of all our experiences, we stumble across the Source of all these experiences, the inner cause of our transformation. That moment is an important one. Your heart just melts in gratitude. You are so moved, you see. You fall in love with the inner Being.

“Now, your focus shifts. You no longer care about expe­riences. You no longer care about peace or happiness or any passing condition. Why do you want peace when you can have the Peace-­Giver? You no longer care about transformation, either. Meditation now becomes an act of love—­pure and simple. It’s not about getting anything or experiencing anything—­only love.

“This cannot be forced. It happens by itself, naturally. Often, you don’t even notice that it has happened! Somewhere along the line, you fell in love without even realizing it. It’s like a girl who realizes that she’s been in love with her friend for years, without ever knowing it.

“And whenever there is love, longing is also present—­the craving for togetherness. That craving contains a subtle pang. It is the pang of separation. It’s the lover’s pain of being away from his beloved. This longing can become profound. This is the first stage of bhakti .”

“Please explain what bhakti is,” I said.

“It has many aspects,” said Daaji. “The main one is the quality of devotion, meaning that you are lovingly devoted to the highest ideal. You are in love with the Divine. This cannot happen unless you have had some experience of the Divine. But even then, that experience only creates a craving for a more complete and permanent experience. It proves to you that there is something wondrous, something beyond the physical reality. Yet, having had such an experience, you then find yourself thrown back into the mundane. The experience has passed, and you no longer feel the divine presence so clearly, so tangibly. It was only a glimpse, so now you begin to crave it in earnest. As a result, you recommit yourself to your spiritual practice. You devote yourself to it. A new sense of purpose starts to drive you.”

“The pain of longing that you are describing seems to run counter to the attitude of nonexpectation and openness that you discussed earlier,” I said. “I mean, to crave and to be nondemanding seem like contradictory approaches.”

“It’s the most beautiful contradiction,” said Daaji.

“But how does it work?” I said. “How do you reconcile them?”

“I’ll share an example,” said Daaji. “There are some places in the world where if a boy wants to marry a girl, his family barters for her. If the girl’s family still refuses, his family might even kidnap her. Compare that to a boy who gets down on one knee with flowers and a ring. ‘Darling, will you marry me?’ he asks. With all his heart, he wants to marry her—­but he allows the choice to be hers . His love is nondemanding. It surrenders to the object of its love.

“Longing is fine, but it should contain no force. It should be respectful. Reverential, even. And it should be accepting. Love never compels, you see.

“Without a craving heart, it is easy to be nondemanding. Would you be demanding about something that you don’t even care about? It’s only when you long for something with all your heart that the sentiment of nonexpectation becomes noble. That is the second stage of bhakti. In the first stage, there was love and longing. In the second stage, there is still love and longing, but there is also a graceful acceptance of your situation, whatever it may be.

“Acceptance is a cheerful thing. There is no such thing as grudging acceptance. You are either grudging or you are accepting! You can’t be both. Acceptance is from the heart. You cannot force yourself to accept a situation that your heart is rejecting from inside. In real acceptance, there is joy. Even if the girl you love says no, you are still happy. Love does not exist for the sake of receiving anything in return. That would be sacrilege. Rather, it exists for its own sake. You love for the sake of love. That is unconditional love, which is the only kind of love that there is. Love demands nothing. In love, there is no place for expectation, but only for gratitude. That is why love is the pinnacle of human nobility.

“When love backs our actions, we never feel resentment. We never feel put upon. We never feel life to be a chore. This is especially true with meditation. Our hearts should call out for it. Practicing meditation should never be a matter of discipline or willpower. It’s okay if you don’t feel like meditating one day. It’s natural. In that case, however, it is better not to do it. Suppose you tell your wife, ‘Darling, I am using all of my willpower to sit beside you.’ End of married life! No lover meets his beloved out of a sense of obligation. Think back to those days when you skipped school to meet a girlfriend. If she said, ‘I’ll meet you at the movie theater at 11:00,’ you’d be there by 10:30. Perhaps she’d arrive by 10:00 just to test you! Some people regard meditation as a discipline, you see. They use willpower to get out of bed in the morning and meditate. Willpower is useless stuff. It means you don’t have interest. When you really look forward to meditation, you wake up automatically. You don’t even need to set an alarm. If you do set one, you’ll wake up before it goes off. A joyful anticipation runs through your subconscious all night as you sleep and by morning, your heart is already dancing. You’re in meditation even before you sit.

“Of course, we cannot expect this attitude at the beginning! It takes some time for it to develop. Rather, it takes time for it to become conscious . Bhakti is innate, you see, but it is unconscious at first. At some point, though, it surfaces to our conscious awareness. It becomes a sentiment, an emotion. But it cannot stay that way forever. It’s like a whale that surfaces, just for a moment. It takes a breath and dives beneath the ocean waves again.”

“Why does it not remain a conscious feeling?” I asked.

“A love relationship consists of two,” he said, “the lover and beloved. However, when there are two, there is also separation. They are distinct from one another—­separate entities. This is inherent in the term ‘bhakti.’ Bhakti is derived from the Sanskrit root bhaj. Bhaj has varied meanings, but one crucial meaning is ‘separate.’ Without separation, without the distinction of lover and beloved, there can be no relationship at all. But if lover and beloved remain distinct, love also remains an unfulfilled promise. There is no consummation—­there is no union .

“Some people enjoy that state of longing. There is emotion in that longing. Perhaps they would prefer to stay there forever. However, we should not stay there. There is no utility in longing unless it leads to union. And in union, there can be no relationship either, because there are no longer two . Lover and beloved have now become one. That is the consummation of love.”

“So in relationship, there is no togetherness, and in togetherness, there is no relationship,” I said.

“It is a paradox!” said Daaji, with a laugh. “When lover and beloved become one, they lose their individual identities. There is no longer any distinction between them. So tell me, when there is no lover, who loves? And when there is no beloved, who receives love?

“You see, love is something that never really arrives. We approach it, and before we arrive, we have already transcended it. But we never pass through it! It gets closer and closer, and when it can get no closer, the whole business is already behind us. It is a mysterious thing!

“That is the destination to which we ply on this journey. We call it union, but it is actually beyond union.”

“How is it beyond union?” I asked.

“Because union contains a subtle feeling that two have become one,” he said. “But if there is any feeling of two, how can it be union? In real union—­when two have truly become one—­there is no idea or feeling of two. Hence, we never become aware that we have united with the beloved. We forget ourselves and the beloved, as well. This state is beyond union. ‘Yoga’ means union, and so it is also beyond yoga.”

“But yoga is the path that takes us there,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “And yoga is not a single path. It contains so many schools and philosophies. It is a hugely diverse system. Three of these paths are especially well trodden. They are karma yoga, gyan yoga, and bhakti yoga . Although they are thought to represent different paths of yoga, they are not at all separate from one another. They are actually three aspects of one single path. That single path is called raja yoga . Raja means ‘king,’ so raja yoga means ‘king of yogas.’ It incorporates the other three.

“We have started to explore the meaning of bhakti. Now, let’s take a brief look at karma and gyan yoga. Karma means ‘action.’ It’s a broad term. If we want to be literal, we can call each and every thing we do karma. Tying your shoes is karma. Eating a sandwich is karma. But those things are not karma yoga. Karma yoga is the yoga of action. It is the action we take in order to achieve the goal of yoga.

“There is an old saying: ‘No animal jumps into the mouth of the sleeping lion.’ In order to achieve, we have to act. We have to do . And why do something? The path of karma yoga has traditionally focused on developing the quality of desireless action—­nishkam karma , as it is called. In nishkam karma, you are supposed to act without thinking of any result. But without a result in mind, why would you act at all? Action comes only when you have a particular goal in mind. Yoga has a well-­defined goal, and this goal demands action. It will not happen simply because you wish for it. Any action we undertake for the sake of attaining that goal now becomes karma yoga. Therefore, meditation is karma yoga.

“Now let’s take a look at gyan yoga. Gyan means ‘knowledge,’ and so gyan yoga is the path of knowledge. But can it be enough to simply read books or philosophize? A rigorous intellectual process is not sufficient. By itself, it will not enable us to perceive ultimate reality. Only meditation can achieve this. With meditative practice, the mind becomes an unfiltered medium, allowing only truth to pass through it. Then our thinking no longer misleads us, but brings us to the right conclusions instead. Therefore, meditation is gyan yoga as well.

“Through meditation, we are also able to better understand the wisdom of others who have walked the path before us. Unless we meditate, such knowledge tends to go over our heads. It does not resonate with our experience, so we cannot relate to it. Often, a beginning meditator may read a spiritual book, but they may not understand much of it. If they read it again after having meditated for some time, they’ll start to find gems that they didn’t notice on the first read. Certain books—­such as the books by Babuji—­have so much depth that no matter how many times you read them, you’ll always find something new. Even after four decades, his writings still reveal new things to me.”

“From what you’re saying, it seems like meditation facilitates both approaches,” I said. “It facilitates both gyan and karma.”

“It is the essence of both approaches,” said Daaji. “It is through meditation that gyan and karma come to fruition. Bhakti also. So meditation is key. These three themes—­karma, bhakti, and gyan—­are universal. In every spiritual movement, at least one or two of these themes is present. They may not be called by their Sanskrit names, but they are there. We find the combination of gyan and bhakti in nearly every religion. For example, almost every religion contains a scriptural element. That is gyan, or knowledge. Religions also tend to have a devotional element, which is bhakti. But not every religion offers a practice that would allow an aspirant to experience the truth of its scriptures for themselves, and to have a real, nonimaginary experience of the object of their worship. In other words, even when gyan and bhakti are present, there isn’t always a functional element of karma yoga. Of course, every religion has its own rituals, and in the widest sense, those rituals do represent action, or karma. After all, those rituals are actions taken by the seeker for the sake of coming closer to the deity. But in order to become conscious of the Divine, consciousness must first evolve to a divine level. Without a sound meditative practice that can accomplish this, the Divine will remain an abstraction to us.

“So, it is through practice that we gain knowledge—­gyan—­and it is through practice that we nourish bhakti. If you haven’t come into real contact with the Ultimate Source, what kind of bhakti can there be? You haven’t experienced anything. You haven’t truly known the Divine. Without practice, bhakti remains disconnected from its object. It becomes externalized. We think of God, and our imaginations start working. Perhaps we imagine a glorious being, seated upon a heavenly throne. Or, we conceive of an abstract source of power and energy. God exists, but until we go within and feel that presence, God remains a concept—­a mental formulation.

“With the imagination, you can create many things that are not real. In fact, you can only create things that are unreal. You may create wonderful illusions. You may create terrible hallucinations. They are your own creations, and they are unreal.

“Meditation does not create anything at all. Meditation reveals. What does it reveal? That which is real, that which is authentic, that which is true. Lies are created. Untruth is created. Reality can never be created—­it is as it is.

“You see, meditation itself is bhakti. The word ‘bhakti’ has become synonymous with worship in its various forms. To some, it is making offerings to God. For others, it may be singing devotional songs. These are outward expressions of love. But when such outward expressions are devoid of inner feeling, worship becomes mechanical. Then, it is only a ritual—­all form and no essence. It is like an empty husk or a lifeless body. Yet, when that inner feeling—­that attitude of bhakti—­is indeed present, should any outward expression be necessary?

“That is why meditation is a silent activity. It is worship, but an inner worship. In deep meditation, worship is no longer an act, but a state of being, an intrinsic quality of the heart. This is only possible when the object of worship is internal.”

Daaji paused.

“Of course, this does not mean that you worship yourself!” he said with a laugh. “That would only be vanity. Some would even call it blasphemy. Rather, it means that you come into an ever-­deepening contact with the divine presence inside your own heart.

“The Divine is everywhere, but in that case, it is also within you. So why look externally? When the Divine is found within, we call it the Self with a capital S . We find it when we plunge into to the absolute depths of consciousness. There, you find that there is something upon which consciousness rests. You find that consciousness has a foundation. Then you go even deeper and find that that foundation has its own foundation, and that under this foundation is an infinite foundation. This infinite foundation is the Self, the underlying reality of all things, animate or otherwise. Yet, it has no existence of its own. It is beyond existence and nonexistence, you see. Nevertheless, it is the root of all existence. It is its support. And then there is something beyond that, too. But by realizing the foundation of universality in your own heart, you transcend all that is individual, all that is limited.

“However, the term ‘Self’ can be deeply misleading. When we read or hear the word, it can conjure up a feeling of ‘I-­ness,’ or individuality. Yet, the yogic concept of Self implies something universal. It is the common Self, a Self that is both impersonal and deeply personal. It is the heart and soul of each and every thing.”

“If the term is so easily misunderstood, why use it?” I asked.

“Often, I don’t,” said Daaji, “for this very reason. At the same time, it also shows us something important. It shows us that it is impossible to find that universal foundation outside of oneself. To find it, you must go within. By going to the foundation of your own existence, you discover that shared foundation, the common denominator for all existence. Thus, it is through the personal that you discover the universal. It is through the subjective that you realize the objective.”

“How do you know when you have encountered the Self?” I asked.

“You cannot know,” he replied. “To find the Self is to forget yourself entirely. You cannot be conscious of having found it. If you are, then you haven’t found the real Self. Then, it’s only your ego. Real meditation begins when you are no longer aware that you are meditating. It begins when you go beyond experience.”

“But you have been speaking so much about how we must experience the Divine, rather than just thinking about it or believing in it,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji, “but truly speaking, we never experience the Divine, but only the effect that it has upon us. The divine Self does not act upon us, but because of it, we are transformed. The Self does not inspire us, but through it, we become inspired. The Self does not bestow anything upon us. It has nothing to give. But because of it, we receive. We must go beyond all this. To meditate for the sake of receiving anything is against etiquette. The best attitude is one of love and gratitude, which develops over time as a result of our ever-­deepening contact with the Source within. Again, I say that yogic transmission brings this about very quickly. As a result, meditation becomes the true essence of worship.

“Such worship is devoid of any pomp or show. It is devoid of words, forms, and even ideas. Simply put, it is to melt away in that loving essence. Then, two become one, and even the idea of worship falls away. That is bhakti at its highest pitch, and it comes through the practice of meditation.

“Of course,” Daaji added, “we also find many examples of meditation practices that do not lead to bhakti. I would call that mechanical practice. It’s a technical approach, having no heart, but only discipline.

“So, as I said earlier, all three approaches are necessary—­karma, bhakti, and gyan. They are three legs of the same stool. Remove any one of them, and it becomes nonfunctional. But combine the three together, and the result is greater than the sum of its parts. It’s superb. Raja yoga combines the three, with the effect that we are immediately put into contact with the Self. This happens in our very first meditation session. There is one very old text, Amanaska Yoga by Gorakshanatha, which describes the Self as a king seated within us.”

“And raja means ‘king,’” I said.

“That is why this path is called raja yoga,” said Daaji.

“And that is what Heartfulness is,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “It is a streamlined version of raja yoga—­streamlined in the sense that it has been made effective for modern seekers who don’t have the luxury of dropping everything and devoting every waking moment to meditation.”

“Regarding all these approaches to yoga that you have just described, which should be our main focus?” I asked.

“Focus on the practice,” said Daaji. “Focus on the three elements of the Heartfulness practice: meditation, cleaning, and prayer. Practice them meticulously. Practice is the most important thing because it is through practice that everything else comes. Without practice, there is no karma, bhakti, or gyan. Without practice, there is no yoga. It is practice that leads to mastery of yoga, and mastery of yoga only means mastery of one’s own self. That is what a master is—­one who has mastered themselves. As Babuji said, ‘I have not come to make disciples. I have come to make masters.’ So practice.

“However,” he added, “it is yogic transmission that makes the practice of Heartfulness so transformative. Like the fabled philosopher’s stone that turns even lead into gold, transmission can ultimately transform even the hardest heart into a sacred temple of God.”





Yogic Transmission


As a new meditator, I was mystified by the concept of yogic transmission. Initially, my intellect rejected the idea because it was beyond the scope of anything I had ever heard of or even considered plausible. On the other hand, my own experience of transmission was that it was the best thing that had ever happened to me. Therefore, I struggled to bridge my worldview with my own experience. But experience has a funny way of changing a person’s worldview. Having already meditated for a few years without transmission, I could clearly perceive that the two experiences were fundamentally different from one another. With transmission, meditation gained a new dynamism. More importantly, it became transformative. I immediately noticed profound changes in myself, which continued to unfold over years. When I became a Heartfulness trainer, I learned how to help others meditate with transmission as well. Yet, transmission remains mysterious—­as all sacred things must be. Therefore, I was eager to hear what Daaji would reveal about it.

“Yogic transmission is the hallmark of our method,” said Daaji. “On its own, our meditation technique is just another technique—­no better or worse than any other. But transmission is absolutely unique. It is what makes all the difference. Transmission is the key to the Heartfulness approach. It’s what makes this method so powerful.”

“In many spiritual traditions,” I said, “the term transmission refers to the means by which a teaching is conveyed. However, its meaning is different here, in the Heartfulness context.”

“Divine knowledge is never taught ,” said Daaji. “Rather, it is caught. It is absorbed by the sincere seeker when the moment is just right. In the field of spirituality, teaching becomes a paradox. Until you become awakened, any teaching will fall upon deaf ears. After awakening, teaching becomes unnecessary. Real awakening does not come from hearing inspired words. Nor does it come from reading books. It cannot. No description of a spiritually awakened state can create that same state in another, no matter how eloquent it may be. Between guru and aspirant, there is a resonance of hearts. The awakened state is transmitted like a flame passed from one candle to the other. The guru triggers that resonance and, through it, creates a state of spiritual awakening in the student.”

“What is transmission exactly?” I asked.

“In the mundane world, we are already familiar with the concept of transmission,” said Daaji. “For instance, we can transmit sound, we can transmit speech, and we transmit so many other things as well. With yogic transmission, we transmit the very essence of spirituality. Transmission is a sacred emanation from the Original Source. It is nothing less than this. We could call it the essence of God, and that would also be correct.”

“So transmission doesn’t originate from the person transmitting,” I said.

“Does a fan create the air that it blows on you?” he replied. “We are surrounded by air at all times, but we don’t notice it unless there is a breeze. In the same way, we tend not to notice the constant presence of Divinity in our lives, though it surrounds us and infuses us. However, with transmission, that presence becomes subtly animated. The divine energy moves. It moves toward us and moves within us. Like leaves dancing in the wind, our hearts begin to vibrate along with that divine flow.”

“What role does the guru have in this?” I asked.

“The guru is like a ceiling fan,” said Daaji. “His role is to trigger that movement. Transmission doesn’t belong to him. He doesn’t own it. Nobody does! Transmission is the essence of nature. In Sanskrit, we call it ‘pranahuti.’ Let’s examine this word. Pranahuti comes from two root words: prana and ahuti. Classically, prana means ‘life force,’ but people generally understand prana as ‘breath.’ This understanding may be correct if you view it as the breath of the Ultimate.”

He paused.

“You see, transmission utilizes prana’s subtlest essence,” he said. “We could go even further and call transmission the essence of the essence . Its subtlety defies expression. It is equal only to Divinity.

“However, a question now arises. Do we not already have that essence within us? There is already an entity within that provides us with that continuous impulse of existence.”

“The soul,” I said.

Daaji nodded. “You know,” he said, “in India, the summer is very hot. The land becomes parched, and the leaves on the trees start to die. In fact, the whole tree looks as if it is about to die! Yet, its roots absorb just enough moisture and nutrients from the Earth to keep it alive. But when the monsoon rains finally arrive, the trees really come to life. They even look as if they are dancing! They have so much freshness. They are so vibrant.

“Just as a tree draws moisture and nutrients through its root system, we continuously draw sustenance from the soul. But when we receive our very first dose of transmission, we become like a tree dancing in the monsoon rains. Our lives gain a new freshness—­an unimaginable freshness! In a very real sense, new life is breathed into us.

“Now we come to pranahuti’s other Sanskrit root: ahuti. Ahuti means ‘offering.’ It can also be taken to mean sacrifice. Remembering that prana is the essential, elemental life force, we now understand that transmission, or pranahuti, is an offering of that pure essence.

“To whom is this offering made? It is made to us . The Ultimate Source offers itself to each of us. In this light, we are reminded of Christianity, where the Lord sacrifices himself for the sake of all, where he gives of himself. So, we can understand transmission as a process by which the Ultimate infuses us with its own essence. As a result, our job becomes easier. We do not need to trek into the jungles as so many spiritual seekers have done throughout the ages. We do not have to ascend any steep mountains. As the saying goes: ‘If the mountain will not come to Mohammed, then Mohammed must go to the mountain.’ Since time immemorial, aspirants have been going to the mountain. They have suffered there. They have made sacrifices. They have taken great pains and made great renunciations for the sake of the Divine. But with transmission, it is the Ultimate that makes the sacrifice. The mountain does come to you. This becomes the impetus for an extraordinary spiritual expansion.”

“How so?” I asked.

“When a higher force acts upon us, we need not rely upon our own limited capacities,” said Daaji. “Just think of the oxygen tank worn by a scuba diver. It allows her to breathe underwater, which normally she could not do. This enables her to dive deeper in the ocean and remain submerged for longer periods of time. Similarly, transmission enables us to access levels of consciousness that could normally take years or even decades to achieve on our own. There are also certain passes that are nearly impossible to access. Transmission keeps us moving through all of them.

“Some stages of the spiritual journey can be extremely attractive to the seeker. They are filled with such joy, peace, and bliss. In fact, they are so compelling that we become tempted to settle down there and abandon the spiritual journey altogether. But this would be like staying in the same school class, year after year. There would be no evolution. Sadly, many seekers lose their way like this. Transmission will never allow for this, however.

“Some stages are so wondrous that we think there’s nothing more to achieve. I made it! we think. But there is always something more! It is an infinite journey, after all. In an infinite journey, the path itself becomes the goal. It is to put one foot in front of the other and continue evolving. Transmission provides us with that evolutionary pull. It literally plucks us out of one stage and deposits us in the next, at just the right moment. In that sense, it acts as safeguard, preventing stagnation at any stage of the journey. Otherwise, we could remain in certain places for a very long time. In fact, we could remain there forever.”

“Forever?” I said.

“You see, every stage can be infinite,” said Daaji. “In mathematics, for instance, you can have a line that has no beginning and no end. It stretches to infinity in both directions. But is it actual infinity? It’s only a line. It is one-­dimensional. In a similar way, it is possible to expand infinitely in a sort of one-­dimensional fashion. That is what happens when we stop moving, when we are satisfied with whatever we have already achieved.”

“What effect would stagnation have on us?” I asked.

“You would become imbalanced,” said Daaji. “Just as every country has its own customs, every stage along the spiritual journey has its own characteristics. It has its own essential quality. The longer we stay at any juncture, the more we absorb its essential quality into ourselves. It is good to stay in a stage for some time and absorb its essence, but only to a certain extent. If we were to stay there too long, our growth would become lopsided, so to speak. It would be like going to school and learning only one subject. What use is it if you can do astrophysics but don’t know how to read? So even when we stagnate, we are still growing. But in that case, we are only growing in one dimension, in one direction. It is not a holistic growth. It is not evolutionary, but extreme.”

“So transmission prevents this from happening,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “It keeps us moving under all circumstances. It also accelerates our journey. Without transmission, you would have to work extremely hard and for a very long time in order to move from one stage to the next. That is why the spiritual journey is traditionally thought to be so long and arduous. In the mythological lore of India, you find stories of people meditating for thousands of years! If you believed those stories, would you feel like starting the journey? Yet, many do. Spiritual history is replete with tales of sincere aspirants who retreat to forests, caves, and mountaintops, where they put themselves through extreme austerities—­all for the sake of spiritual illumination. In India, it is widely accepted that one must undergo hardship in order to attain the highest states.

“I once thought the same. As a teenager, I was inspired by Ramakrishna Paramahansa and his disciple Swami Vivekananda. In the late nineteenth century, Swami Vivekananda traversed the entire country of India—­largely on foot—­spreading his inspiring message wherever he went. Well, in May 1976, when I was nineteen years old, I decided to follow in Vivekananda’s footsteps and left home to be a wandering monk—­a sanyasi , as we call them in India. But unlike Vivekananda, I had no message. I was still searching for spiritual awakening. I was purely a seeker.

“On the banks of the river Narmada in Gujarat, I encountered a band of sanyasis on the veranda of an old temple. I knew nothing about their way of life. I noticed an old man with matted hair, who seemed to be their leader. His life of austerities had made him thin and frail. Eventually, he called me and asked what I was doing there. I told him that I sought something beyond what the world could promise.

“‘You will find God,’ he said, ‘but not like this!’

“This old sanyasi was straightforward and sincere. He poured his heart out to me, in fact. He was filled with regret for taking this path in life. He told me how he had left his home as a young man. He hadn’t informed anyone. Nobody knew what happened to him. He just disappeared.

“‘I never saw my family again,’ he said. ‘My wife … I don’t know what happened to her. I don’t know what became of my children.’

“He was haunted by all this. He had also become disillusioned with his path. After years of wandering and begging for alms, his spiritual goal still eluded him. His search was genuine, but misdirected, you see. And he knew he had gone the wrong way. In fact, he had considered returning home decades earlier, but couldn’t face his family.

“I can still hear his parting words: ‘You will not find God like this!’”

“How long did you live like this?” I asked.

“About six hours.”

Hearing this, I burst into laughter. I had assumed that Daaji had spent weeks, or even months, wandering around rural India.

“When did you first experience transmission?” I asked.

“On August 12, 1976,” said Daaji. “At the time, I was living in a hostel at my pharmacy college. Sometimes, I would try to meditate, but I didn’t really know how to do it. I would sit on my bed and try to think profound thoughts. One of my fellow students observed me doing this over a period of time and said, ‘Hey Kamlesh, why don’t you let me take you to someone who can teach you how to meditate properly.’ He put it very crudely, actually. ‘I know a chick that can put you in a trance,’ he said. When he took me to meet her, the ‘chick’ turned out to be an elderly woman! And the ‘trance’? It was samadhi, the eighth step in Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras . Often, people think samadhi to be an extremely high attainment that takes many years to achieve. But with transmission, it came immediately.

“I remember how warmly this woman welcomed me when I arrived at her home. When she asked why I had come, I related my earlier experience with the sanyasis. She said, ‘It is true that God is in the jungles and mountains where those monks roam. The Divine is everywhere. But if God is everywhere, He is also inside you. In that case, why seek Him in any other place?’

“I was struck by this statement. She invited me to meditate along with her, and in this meditation, I received transmission for the first time. That experience just finished me off! Never before had I experienced anything like it. I was so impressed. Then, she impressed me again. After the meditation was finished, she had tears in her eyes. She was so grateful that I had come to meet her. Imagine the trainer being grateful to the student! It occurred to me that I had never witnessed such humility before. I had the same thought all over again when I first met Babuji, who was her guru as well.

“Now, how could a novice like myself have been able to have this kind of experience in the very first meditation? It was due only to transmission. Without transmission, we struggle to master even our everyday, mundane consciousness. I have met many seasoned meditators who still have difficulty with meditation, even after years of practice. My wish for them is that they experience transmission at least once in their lives. That is what allows us to transcend the mundane consciousness. Our consciousness gets an upgrade, you see. It becomes divinized.”

Then Daaji laughed. “Of course, now you have to learn to handle your divinized consciousness. That’s another story!”

He paused.

“We also use transmission to create noble qualities in the seeker. Here, I’m reminded of Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras again. The second of his eight steps is called niyama. Lalaji [the first guru in the Heartfulness tradition] had an interesting take on niyama. He defined it as ‘the infusion of noble qualities.’ This is exactly what we accomplish with transmission.

“And while we’re talking about the Yoga Sutras , it also bears mention that transmission helps us fulfill its fourth step as well.”

“Pranayama,” I said.

“You see, most people think that pranayama is only a set of breathing exercises,” said Daaji. “That’s why the word ‘prana’ is usually associated with the breath. But pranayama has a deeper meaning. The word is composed of two roots: prana and aayaama. We already discussed the traditional meaning of prana, which is life force. Aayaama means ‘expanding.’”

“So ‘pranayama’ means ‘expanding life force,’” I said.

“Right,” said Daaji. “It has nothing to do with breathing, per se. Whenever we receive transmission, we are receiving the very highest force into our hearts. From there, it expands throughout the entire system. ‘Expanding life force.’ So this is how yogic transmission fulfills the objective of pranayama.”

“And this is the reason that breathing exercises are not part of Heartfulness practice,” I said.

“Yes, when we have access to transmission, pranayama becomes redundant,” said Daaji. “But that doesn’t mean that transmission and pranayama are equivalent to one another.”

“I’ve read that Ramakrishna transmitted his spiritual wealth to Swami Vivekananda,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “It’s true. Swami Vivekananda was also able to transmit, but never spoke about it. There are other examples to be found as well. Transmission is present in certain strands of Sufism, for instance. There, it is known as tavajjoh. There is mention of it in Tibetan Buddhism as well, and there are also references to it in certain yogic texts, such as Yoga Vasishta . You see, transmission does not belong exclusively to any one path, just as God does not belong to any particular religion. If a person is completely merged in the Source, they can distill that divine essence and distribute it to others.

“But it is extremely rare to find such a person. Great personalities such as my gurus have hardly existed throughout history. You see, if a guru is not completely merged in the original Source, they still may be able to transmit. But in that case, what are they transmitting? Only their own, limited state of being. Such a person is not connected to anything higher than themselves. And even if they are connected to something higher, their transmission will be limited to the extent that they have not dissolved themselves in God.”

“And that limitation will inhibit the transmission’s effectiveness,” I said.

“Of course,” said Daaji. “You see, in the deepest levels of samadhi, our state resembles the original state that prevailed before we came into being. At that time, there was no movement, but only stillness. But in that stillness, there was immense potential. There was immense energy. When that energy is set into motion, we recognize it as the original force, or adi shakti. Yogic transmission is that original force. It is the adi shakti. Only the original force can bring us to the original state.

“In fact, an even better term than ‘original force’ would be ‘forceless force.’ You see, transmission has an effect, but causes no reaction. Usually, force creates a reaction, but has no effect. When you berate someone, they react. But is there an effect? Does that intense scolding change them? Force always creates reactions. Only love can create an effect without causing a reaction. Due to transmission—­this loving, forceless force—­we are able to regain our original state of union with the Source, which is the very definition of yoga.”

“So in order to reach the ultimate state, the transmission we receive must come from that ultimate level,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji, “and only a person who has evolved to become identical to that ultimate state will be able to activate the Source, in the form of yogic transmission. Here, Lalaji made a key innovation. He discovered a method by which a person who is completely merged in the Source can prepare others so that they become vehicles, or conduits, for his own transmission. This discovery is what allows us to have so many thousands of volunteer Heartfulness trainers around the world, each imparting transmission on the guru’s behalf.”

“So Heartfulness trainers are conduits for the guru’s transmission,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “The guru prepares them and works through them. A trainer can even be a novice meditator, but their transmission still equals that of the person who prepared them, who enabled them to impart transmission.

“In my view, this is a remarkable step in the history of spirituality because a mere beginner can now do the very same ­spiritual work as an evolved personality. And the guru is also a conduit in this process because really, it is nature’s process! Transmission is an aspect of nature’s evolutionary work with humanity.”

“But in that case, shouldn’t we receive transmission automatically, without having to meditate?” I asked.

“A farmer must prepare his fields if he is to be benefitted by the rain,” Daaji replied. “Nature is as it is, so we attune ourselves to it. That is why we practice.”

“By which means is the divine impulse transmitted into our hearts?” I asked.

“What do you mean?” asked Daaji.

“Take sound, for instance,” I said. “Sound requires a medium that can vibrate, such as air or water. Does transmission require any kind of medium in order to reach us?”

“In Yoga Vasishta, it is said: ‘By means of sight, by means of word, by means of touch, the one who can infuse Divinity in the disciple and enlighten him is indeed the real guru,’” said Daaji. “In many yogic stories, we hear of situations in which a guru merely glances at a disciple, thereby awakening them. In the Sufi tradition, it is common for a sheikh to gently touch the chest of an aspirant in order to infuse their heart with spiritual energy. But in our way, we do not use any of these methods. We do not use physical touch. We don’t need a guru or a trainer to look at us, and we don’t need them to speak to us. Here, transmission flows unseen—­but it is not unfelt! Its medium is thought. You see, the trainer merely thinks of transmission, and it begins to flow. But at times, it flows automatically, without the trainer even thinking about it. In that case, what would its medium be? Anyway, something only requires a medium if it has to travel somewhere. But transmission reaches its target instantaneously. Even light cannot travel instantly. If transmission can traverse any distance in zero time, its velocity must be infinite. That is because it comes directly from the infinite Source, which is in all places at once without being in any place in particular.”



Seekers start the Heartfulness practice by meditating along with a Heartfulness trainer, also known as a preceptor , who triggers the transmission on their behalf. These meditation sessions are called sittings . Sittings can take place in person, or they can happen remotely, where the trainer and aspirant meditate at the same time in different locations.

The role of the trainer does not end after the initial sittings. Rather, trainers continue to be available for ongoing sittings. Ideally, the aspirant takes a few sittings per month from a trainer. The main purpose of taking ongoing sittings with trainers is to provide us with opportunities to receive transmission. This supplements our daily individual practice. Our daily practice also helps us digest and absorb the transmission we receive during sittings.

Trainers are not selected because of their degree of advancement. They are chosen based on their willingness to serve and their knowledge of the Heartfulness approach. They need not be any more advanced than the seekers they are serving. They are volunteers performing a certain service, and just like any other aspirant, trainers must practice daily and take regular sittings from other trainers.



“I would say that to have so many trainers who are endowed with the capacity of transmission is unprecedented in the history of spirituality,” said Daaji. “In the past, transmission was hidden. It was a completely esoteric art. Now, it is freely available. That it remained hidden in previous times is not due to the selfishness of those who had the capacity to transmit. It’s just that today’s paradigm is different. Humanity’s evolutionary stage is different. The times now demand that transmission be widespread. That is where Heartfulness fits in, its role being to fulfill this need. To serve all is its raison d’être .

“Spiritual service must be selfless. We could never think of charging for transmission. That would be sacrilege. Babuji used to say that he received all that he got for free, so he freely gave all that he had. God is not for sale. He has no price. If He did—­and if you could afford to pay it—­then why would you need Him? If anybody ever asks you to pay for spiritual service, ask them that question.

“My dream is for all spiritual movements to unite together and benefit from this transmission. I always say that there is no need for you to leave your religious or spiritual tradition. Transmission is for all of humanity, you see. Regardless of your religion or culture, you can meditate with transmission. It does not matter whether you are Christian or Muslim, Jewish or Buddhist—­transmission will only enhance your faith. You see, faith is the result of our experiences, and transmission is the giver of experience.

“However, no matter how highly we may speak of transmission, it can only be truly appreciated through direct personal experience. Words will never capture its essence. The attempt to grasp transmission intellectually is like trying to intellectually understand the taste of a peach. Is it possible to convey the experience of eating a peach to someone who has never tried one? You can describe its shape, color, texture, and scent, but until you eat one, you won’t know anything about it.

“Therefore, I suggest adopting a scientific approach and testing transmission for yourself. Create an experiment around it.

“For example, in pharmaceutical research trials, volunteers are divided into two groups. The researchers administer the real drug to one group, while administering a placebo to another study group, which is designated as the control group. This process enables the researchers to evaluate the effectiveness of the new drug against the placebo.

“In our experiment, meditation without transmission is the placebo, or the control. By meditating without transmission, we experience the effects of meditation on its own. The next step in the experiment is to connect with a Heartfulness trainer and meditate while receiving yogic transmission. Having meditated first without transmission and then with transmission, we become able to compare the two experiences.

“You see, I do not want people to take my word for anything that I have said about transmission. Try it for yourself and arrive at your own conclusions.”





Part 2





Practicing Heartfulness





3.





Meditation




I n the Heartfulness way, we sit comfortably every day at a fixed time and place, and meditate on the presence of divine light in the heart. For me, meditation is a daily source of clarity, lightness, inspiration, and palpable inner joy. Even though I have meditated in this manner nearly every day for fifteen years, my discussions with Daaji opened new dimensions in my understanding, and yielded profound advances in my practice.





When and Where to Meditate


When I first started Heartfulness, I meditated whenever and wherever I wanted. At that time, I attached no significance to the time or place of meditation. Later on, when my life became more hectic, I started scheduling meditation into my day. The differences between meditating at random times versus meditating at a fixed hour were striking. Shortly thereafter, I had to move my meditation to the early morning hours. Then, my meditative practice really took off!

Now, years later, I hoped that Daaji would explain the reasons behind these experiences.

“What is the best time for meditation?” I asked.

“Now,” he said.

“Okay, but are certain times better than others?” I asked.

“Is there a bad time for meditation?” he replied. “You know, I’m reluctant to make any pronouncements on this matter. I don’t want to create any dogma on the subject. To do so would deprive people of the joy that comes with discovering the truth on their own.”

“I understand that,” I said, “but I think that we could benefit from knowing some best practices.”

“Okay, boss,” he said with a laugh. “Well, our elders have passed down so much wisdom regarding meditation timings. But I am a practical person, so I say that you should meditate at the time when you are the least likely to be disturbed! In this busy world, it may not always be possible to meditate at the most ideal time, you see. There are numerous household activities—­raising children, going to work, et cetera. So many demands are present, so we have to choose our time carefully. One solution is to meditate early in the morning, when there aren’t so many things competing for your time and attention. But if you like it, you’ll do it no matter what.

“You see, a sincere meditator will never say, ‘Oh, it’s not convenient for me to meditate today.’ Suppose you tell your friend, ‘I’ll only meet you when it’s convenient for me.’ That means that your convenience is more important to you than your friendship. Meditation is another kind of meeting. It’s a sacred meeting with the Self, which is our friend within.”

“But still, people are so busy these days,” I said. “Many tell me that they have no time for meditation.”

“I’m reminded of one incident,” said Daaji. “Once, a senior minister in the Indian government came to meet Babuji. This official was interested in meditation, but said that he had no time for it. Babuji responded by asking him whether anyone was busier than he.”

“‘Yes,’ said the official. ‘The Prime Minister is busier.’ At that time, the Prime Minister was Indira Gandhi.

“Babuji replied, ‘Then give me the difference between her busyness and your busyness and devote that time to meditation.’

“If meditation had really been a priority, he would not have complained about how busy he was. He would have simply made the time. By contrast, the woman who taught me to meditate was immensely passionate about meditation. She faced a lot of opposition from her family, though. Intense opposition! So how did she handle it? Every day, she woke up before everyone else and meditated in bed while pretending to be asleep. Sometimes, she pretended to use the bathroom and meditated there. Her life revolved around meditation, you see. If you’re passionate about something, you will always find a way. As the saying goes, ‘Love laughs at locksmiths.’

“Busy people should also understand that meditation provides many shortcuts in life. Often, we invest a lot of time and energy in various endeavors. Sometimes they come to fruition, and other times they do not. For example, someone courts a romantic interest for years, but eventually, the other person backs off. Or, you may expend a lot of time trying to build a business relationship, but it proves fruitless in the end. Wouldn’t it have been better to understand the reality of these situations from the very start? Meditation provides a level of insight that allows us to appreciate situations for what they actually are. This can save us years of time.

“Therefore, meditation is an enormous time-saver. I would even say that the less time you have, the more vital meditation becomes. If you can meditate for even five minutes at a fixed time every day, it will be of great benefit. So do meditate—­especially when you don’t have enough time!”

“So you recommend meditating at a fixed time,” I said.

“See, we have to create automatism in our practice. That means that we should meditate at the same time and same place, daily—­whatever that time may be. This must become second nature. It should be so automatic that we never have to think about it.”

“Why is this regularity so important?” I asked.

“See how nature is,” said Daaji. “It has unfailing rhythm. The sun rises and sets, the seasons turn, the tides rise and recede. All this happens with absolute precision, with absolute rhythm, with total regularity. Our lives are also governed by nature’s rhythms. When we are in tune with them, we sail through life. Otherwise, it is like swimming upstream. We struggle.

“Take sleep cycles, for instance. If you go to bed at the same time every night, you’ll be asleep as soon as your head hits the pillow. You won’t ever have problems trying to fall asleep. Similarly, if you meditate at the same time every day, meditation will happen by itself. It will happen so naturally. You won’t ever have to expend effort in order to meditate deeply.

“Our forerunners also discovered that certain times in the day are especially conducive to meditation. They referred to these times as sandhyas , or ‘conjunctions.’ They call them conjunctions because these times are moments when one part of the day joins another. At such moments, nature is supposed to attain a state of balance. By meditating during these periods of balance, we absorb that balance into ourselves. It becomes part of our nature, you see. These junctions are the hour before sunrise, noon, and dusk. For me, noon is the best. It just works like a rocket!”

“Do you mean solar noon or noon according to the clock?” I asked.

“I mean noon!” said Daaji, with a laugh.

“For me, meditation is so much better before sunrise,” I said.

“This is why I encourage people to test these timings for themselves,” he said. “Meditate before sunrise. Meditate at noon. Is there a difference? Now, compare that to the effect of meditating at a completely different time. You have to find what’s best for you.

“Do not be too rigid with any of this. For instance, how will you meditate at dawn if you live above the arctic circle, where night lasts for six months, and the day lasts for another six months? Or even in parts of Scandinavia, where the sun rises so early and sets very late? The most important thing is regularity. To meditate at one of these recommended times is ideal, but it is of secondary importance compared to our regularity in meditation.

“And it is just as important to have a fixed place for meditation as it is to have a fixed time. For instance, when you enter the kitchen, you think about food. Even if you’re not hungry, you’re tempted to grab a snack. So what happens if you dedicate one room for meditation? By the time you sit in your meditation spot, you’re almost meditating already. If on the other hand you meditate in a different place every day, you’ll spend time trying to get comfortable. The newness of your environment will distract you, even in subtle ways. As a result, you won’t be able to meditate as deeply as you might otherwise.

“Further, our thoughts, emotions, and activities leave traces in the atmosphere. When entering any place, we resonate with what we feel there. For instance, if you visit a hospital, you’ll immediately notice certain effects. You’ll feel some lingering sadness. You’ll feel heaviness around you. There is worry floating in the air.

“Many years ago, I wanted to open a new pharmacy in New York City. One of my employees scouted a great location. It was right next to a hospital. (That’s generally a good spot for a pharmacy.) The owner was willing to sell it, too, and for a low price. I was almost ready to buy it sight unseen. But I went to see it, and as soon as I entered, I felt that something was wrong. At some point during the tour, I went to use the restroom. The moment I entered that room, I felt such a disturbance in the atmosphere. There was a certain helplessness, an immense sadness. I felt that there was a spirit hovering in that area, and I just turned around and left. But even as I walked out, I was haunted by what I can only describe as a cry for help. Later, I asked my employee to find out what had happened there. It turned out that it had recently been the scene of a murder.

“The effects of thoughts and actions linger in a place. By meditating again and again in one place, we create a special atmosphere there—­a meditative atmosphere. Peace and sanctity pervade such an atmosphere. It is light, subtle, and pure. In fact, it becomes a holy place. At the same time, all places are holy! Every atmosphere is divine—­until we corrupt it with our thoughts, emotions, and activities. That is why we should avoid performing other activities in the place where we meditate.”

“Not everyone can reserve an entire room in their house for meditation,” I said.

“You can even dedicate one corner for the purpose,” he replied, “like cats that always nap in the same spot.”

“In the same way that there are ideal times for meditation, are there also ideal places?” I asked.

“Choose circumstances that do not interfere with your practice,” he said. “For instance, you don’t want an environment that is filled with distractions. When your environment is chaotic, your consciousness reflects that disorder. Inner disturbance tends to intensify in the presence of outer chaos. When you sit in a cluttered or dirty room, it affects you. If clothes are scattered everywhere, if books are lying open and dirty dishes are stacked up in the sink, how well can you meditate? A spare, open environment is best. Ideally, your meditation space should have only the chair or mat where you sit. Our external circumstances should be conducive to meditation, bearing in mind that meditation is an inner activity. There should be nothing in our environment to draw us outward, you see. But as we progress, we also develop the ability to be unaffected by our surroundings. For example, in the beginning, we tend to become angry if something disturbs our meditation. With time, external distractions only drive us deeper into ourselves.

“And of course, time and place are not the only two variables that can affect our meditation. On a daily basis, we expose ourselves to so many influences. These influences affect our mood. ‘Why do I feel low today?’ It could be some interaction between your circumstances, your encounters, a dream you had, something you ate, a state of health. After a chaotic day, you cannot help but be affected. If you come home and meditate at that time, your meditation may not be as easy as if you had meditated first thing in the morning, for example. In the early morning, nothing has had a chance to affect you yet. You’re a blank slate.

“So I hope people test all these things for themselves. Meditate before eating. Meditate after eating. Do you find a difference? Meditate before bathing. Meditate after bathing. Is there a different effect? People have spoken and written much about these topics. Some say that we should meditate only after bathing. Well, what about meditating after splashing just a little water on your face? Is that sufficient? So try these things and see for yourself. You’ll come to the correct conclusions.”





The Meditative Posture


Before I encountered Heartfulness meditation, I experimented with a few other meditation methods. Whatever their differences may have been, they all shared one commonality. Each attached great importance to posture. In those early days of my meditative journey, I had the impression that profound meditation would only come once I had mastered the meditative pose. As a result, I devoted a lot of energy and attention to my posture. I also looked forward to the day that the pose would become second nature and I would never have to think about it again.

Before one of my early meditation sittings from a Heartfulness trainer, I asked which pose I should adopt. She looked at me and said, “Be comfortable!” I was a little surprised. A short time later, I met some of the local meditators practicing Heartfulness. There, I was surprised again. Among the group, I found no strict adherence to any one particular pose. Many people sat cross-­legged. Others sat in chairs. Nobody looked rigid. Everyone sat in a way that was natural to them. Since then, I have rarely heard Heartfulness meditators even speak about the subject of posture. So, I decided to bring it up with Daaji.

“What is the ideal meditative pose?” I asked.

“We have to look at posture in the context of meditation’s larger purpose,” he said.

“What do we do in meditation? We go within. We move toward the core of our being. In deep meditation, we come into contact with our Source. Dissolving in it, mingling in it, and merging in it, we become one with it. This union represents the true state of yoga. It is a return to the Source from which we originated. Thus, yoga represents the principle of dissolution. It is a return to the moment before our creation, when everything was converged into a singularity. In that singularity, there was no activity. That is why the state of yoga is a state of perfect calm and inner stillness.

“In life, we also find another, opposing movement. It is that which pulls you outward, away from your core. This outward movement represents the principle of creation, which is an active principle.

“However, we must understand that the moment of creation is also a moment of separation . It is the moment that we become separated from our Source. For instance, what happens when a mother gives birth to her baby? It’s a creative act, but it is also a moment of separation. Previously, mother and baby were one. When the mother ate, the baby ate. Their existences were intertwined. After the baby’s birth, they became two distinct entities. One became two.

“Similarly, the creation of the soul is the moment that it becomes separate from its Source. For the first time, unity is lost. For the first time, we experience incompleteness. We experience dissatisfaction. Certain theologies call this ‘the fall.’ With meditation, we reenter that state of unity and stillness. We regain our originality, our universality.

“Many people believe that we can only return to the Source after death. Then, there is the voice of logic, which tells us that the only way we could return to the Source would be to go back in time! Neither is true. Through meditation, we achieve that grand union here and now, while still alive. To master yoga is to transcend the limitations of death and the limitations of time. In the state of yoga, we simultaneously express the principles of creation and dissolution. We are beyond that duality. We are simultaneously active and inactive, time-­bound and eternal.

“This comes with deep meditation. You may wonder what posture has to do with any of this! But the state of deep meditation begins with posture. Our meditative pose can help us turn inward and move us toward our center. Or, it can get in the way.

“We’ve already discussed several of the eight steps of Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras. The last four steps—­pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi—­illustrate our plunge into deep meditation. From pratyahara, which is to turn inward, we proceed through dharana and dhyana, where we rest in the heart. Finally, we enter samadhi, when we start to dissolve into the Source.

“Patanjali’s third step is asana, which means ‘posture.’ In order to choose the best asana, we should consider which pose will best lead to pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi. The first thing we do in meditation is to turn ourselves inward. That’s pratyahara. Our physicality can help us here. If our eyes are wide open, if our bodies are sprawled out, and if our legs are stretched in front of us, it’s not going to help us go within. Such poses lend themselves to a more external orientation. To achieve pratyahara, our physicality has to adopt a contracted form.

“This is, of course, a matter for personal experience. So try both ways. Meditate with your arms and legs stretched out. Meditate with them folded. Then see the difference for yourself.”

“I’ve already experimented with this,” I said.

“What did you find?” he asked.

“It’s just as you said. It was harder for me to really go inside when my limbs were stretched out.”

“That’s why the traditional posture for meditation is a seated pose with folded legs,” said Daaji. “The position of the hands is also important. Ideally, they should be clasped together with the fingers interlocked. Or, you can rest one hand on top of the other. And we meditate with closed eyes.”

“In some methods, people meditate with open eyes,” I said.

“The ancient literature describes the senses as the gates through which awareness flows,” said Daaji. “Sight is the most prominent sense. We tend to focus upon whatever we see, so closing that gate of sight helps us reorient our awareness inward, which is pratyahara. From asana and pratyahara, we then proceed through the rest of the steps: dharana, dhyana, and samadhi.

“In samadhi, we enter into a state of union with the Source. From the Source, we draw a subtle current of energy. By sitting with folded limbs, we form a kind of circuit. This circuit allows that current to flow throughout our system. It passes from limb to limb, cycling around and around again. If our limbs are not in contact with one another, that circuit is broken, and the current escapes and goes to waste.”

“If the Source is infinite, what does it matter if a little energy goes to waste?” I asked.

“You know,” said Daaji, “I once had a personal discussion with Chariji [the third guru in the Heartfulness tradition]. He said, ‘Kamlesh, make as much money as you like. Go ahead. But spend it wisely!’ Chariji’s statement contained a hidden question, you see: If you spend your money wisely, then why would you need so much of it? When you truly value a resource, you want to make the very most of it. You conserve it. In meditation, what we receive is the very highest. It’s the divine essence! So I think that we would not want it to go to waste. The truest form of gratitude is to make good use of what you receive. Posture may seem like a small thing, but in this respect, it cements our relationship with the Source.

“But don’t worry if you can’t sit with folded legs. It’s okay. In that case, sit on a chair with your feet on the ground. But cross your feet at the ankles—­one over the other. That allows you to retain some of the cross-­legged effect. If you have bad knees, then don’t try it. You can just keep a small mat under your feet, instead. This will help prevent energy drainage, as long as it’s made from nonconductive material.”

“This idea is completely new to me,” I said.

“The ancients tended to meditate on animal skins,” said Daaji. “It’s because skin is nonconductive. But other materials are just as good. You can sit on a woolen cloth, or a silk-­covered cloth, if that’s more comfortable. A wooden plank, a carpet, or a cushion will all work.”

“What about a sofa?” I asked.

“Yes, a sofa or chair will also suffice,” he said. “As long as the material is nonconductive, it’s okay.”

“Is it alright to use some kind of back support when we meditate?” I asked.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “Many people sit like that and meditate well. But we should definitely avoid resting the head when we meditate. That will put you right to sleep. For the same reason, we should avoid lying down when we meditate.

“However, if you suffer from insomnia, that is also the cure. Lie in bed and start meditating. You’ll fall asleep straight away!

“Now, we have yet to discuss what I consider to be the most important aspect of posture. Your pose should not get in the way. If your pose distracts you from meditation, it defeats its purpose. I’ve just told you that the cross-­legged pose is ideal, but is it ideal for you ? Each body is unique. Some people prefer to sit on the floor, while others can’t sit without a chair. Because there is such difference between bodies, we can never expect uniformity. We can never expect all people to adopt the same posture for meditation. The cross-­legged pose works well for some, but other people can’t meditate like that. If a pose doesn’t work for you, then you should not force yourself to adopt it. It is like the Hippocratic Oath: ‘First, do no harm.’ In fact, Patanjali seems to say the very same thing: Sthira sukham asanam . ‘Posture should be steady and comfortable.’

“Patanjali does not insist that we sit in full lotus position. Nor does he say that we should sit on the ground. He only says, ‘Be steady and comfortable.’ Why should we be steady? If you’re constantly changing your position and fidgeting around, you won’t be able to meditate. Physical steadiness is necessary.

“Now, how to achieve this steadiness? There are two ways. The first way is to be forceful. That is not recommended, of course! Yet, with great effort, it is surely possible to ignore your body’s pain signals and force yourself to be still. Of course, everything will hurt, and you may even injure yourself. But you will be as steady as a rock. Will your mind be as steady? Most likely, it will be busy with the body’s sensations of pain and discomfort. Then, that becomes your object of meditation. With this approach, you go against the body, while preventing the mind from meditating.

“When can both mind and body be steady? Only when you are comfortable. That is the second way—­Patanjali’s way. Without comfort, you fidget. You shift your position this way and that. Continuously, you search for comfort. Then there is no steadiness. When you are comfortable, on the other hand, you have no reason to move. The body does not want to move. You are just fine where you are. Then the body does not distract you.

“We should also avoid excessive comfort. That also binds our attention to the body. Now, it is not as if we are against the body. In fact, we really must thank the body because it is the jumping board from which we dive deeper into consciousness. But we have to jump, and not cling to the board, so for that reason, we avoid any extremes that will make us focus too much on the body. ‘Moderation’ should be our watchword. Therefore, we avoid both discomfort and extreme comfort during meditation.

“Now we come to Patanjali’s next verse: Prayatna saithilyananta samapattibhyam. ‘By relaxation of effort and meditation on the endless, posture is mastered.’

“Let’s understand this. What does it mean to master something? When something is mastered, it becomes second nature. We don’t have to think about it. We don’t have to expend effort for it. To be masterful is to be effortless, you see. If you have to expend effort to achieve your pose, you have not mastered it, and until you have mastered it, you are its slave. So let us not meditate in difficult positions that require so much energy and attention. That only distracts us from meditation. When we are comfortable in our pose, we can turn our attention to the real object of meditation, which Patanjali refers to as ‘the endless.’

“In the samadhi state, you plunge so deeply inside yourself that you lose bodily awareness. Then your head droops. Your body may even slump forward. You have forgotten the body, and in this forgetting, you have transcended it. Only then can we say that the pose is truly mastered. But this has to happen naturally.”

“So we don’t slump on purpose,” I said.

“That would be artificial,” said Daaji. “Rather, you should start meditation in an upright pose, relaxed and comfortable. As you go deeper into meditation, you’ll lose awareness of your pose, and that’s fine. After all, this is meditation—­not gymnastics!”





Relaxation


The relaxation method supplements the three core practices of Heartfulness. Compared to those practices, the method is a recent addition. Furthermore, relaxation method is not strictly a spiritual practice, as its main purpose is to relax the body. However, physical relaxation also provides us with mental and emotional calmness, which facilitates deeper meditation. For this reason, we often use the relaxation method just prior to meditation. The method can also be used on its own as a simple stress-­relief tool, according to our preference.

I vividly remember my introduction to the relaxation method. While sitting with Daaji in his office, he turned to me and said, “Let me show you how to relax.” He proceeded to guide me through the steps of the method, pausing shortly between each one to allow its effects to settle.

When he finished speaking, I found such stillness within myself that I didn’t want to move a single muscle. I didn’t feel like opening my eyes. I didn’t even feel like having a single thought. In fact, my state of relaxation was so profound that it was as if I were already meditating.

Now, one year later, we discussed why he added the relaxation method to the Heartfulness practice.

“I think that relaxation came more easily in early times,” he said. “Our lifestyle was different then. These days, we have to consciously relax ourselves. See what a state we have come to.” “Now, we have to make efforts to achieve effortlessness!

“Effortlessness is essential to meditation. But instead, we tend to apply both physical and mental efforts. As we sit in meditation, we constantly adjust ourselves. We adjust our bodies, we adjust our thoughts, and we adjust our awareness. We make repeated attempts to rest our unsettled consciousness. In all this movement, can we possibly derive rest?”

“It only makes us further unsettled,” I said. “The search for stillness ends up creating its opposite.”

“Then, we become tense,” said Daaji. “We become stressed. I can tell you to be effortless. I can tell you to be open, to be undemanding, to be noninsistent. And you agree. ‘Yes,’ you say. ‘I will not expend any effort in meditation. I will not seek anything; I will not demand anything.’ But what happens when you actually meditate?”

He let the question linger for some time.

“There was once a little boy who lived in the foothills of the Himalayas,” he said. “One morning, he woke up and saw a yogi flying in the sky. The little boy was impressed. The more he thought about this flying yogi, the more he wanted to be able to fly like him. He decided to track him down. He packed a small bag and left early in the morning. After asking around and taking a few wrong turns, some villagers directed him to the hut of this man. ‘I want to fly like you,’ said the boy.

“The yogi said, ‘Okay, why not? I will teach you, but for this, you will have to stay with me for many years as my servant. On the first full moon of your fifteenth year, I will teach you the method.’

“So the boy stayed with him. He carried water from the well, gathered firewood, and cooked all the yogi’s meals, but none of this hard work bothered him at all. He was too excited that he would soon be able to fly.

“Eventually, that day came. Filled with joy, the teenager bounded in to his guru’s room. ‘Tonight is the full-­moon night, my boss. Please tell me how to fly.’ ‘Sure, I will help you,’ said the yogi. ‘Tonight, meditate at midnight, but whatever may happen, don’t think of monkeys. They may jump in your mind, they may dance, they may try to attack you, but don’t think of them. Then the teaching will come to you.’

“So the boy said, ‘Oh, it’s very simple, I can do this—­no monkeys.’

“At midnight, he sat on top of the roof and closed his eyes. First thing, a monkey came into his mind! I am not supposed to think of monkeys! he thought. He tried not to think of them, but the monkeys kept coming. All night long, he fought with monkeys. In the morning, he went back to the yogi and said, ‘This method is rubbish. You shouldn’t have told me anything about monkeys!’

“You see, the boy lost his dream of flying because he was so focused on not thinking about monkeys. By trying not to think about them, monkeys came instead of the teaching. Trying not to do something is counterproductive. And even if you somehow are able to consciously drop your efforts, you still make subliminal efforts. You make unconscious efforts. You cannot help yourself! Effort is difficult to stop, you see. To enforce a state of effortlessness upon yourself requires the biggest possible effort you can make. It’s counterproductive.”

“Why are we so effortful by nature?” I asked.

“Effort is rooted in our primal state of restlessness,” said Daaji. “It is based on the soul’s inherent need to return to its original state, to unite with the Source. That is what this restlessness really is, you see, and that is also what turns us into spiritual seekers. In all this restlessness, you are searching for something. You try to escape the dissatisfaction and unsettledness that you feel in the present moment. Furthermore, you hope that the next moment will bring contentment and peace. Meanwhile, you are afraid of repeating your past—­a past that only led you to your present state of unsettledness. In all of this, you miss out on the endless possibilities of the present moment. Calmness eludes you. Inspiration eludes you.

“You see, we only drop our efforts when we become content. But we are only content when we finally drop our efforts!”

“So it’s a paradox,” I said.

“It’s a catch-­22,” said Daaji. “In the mundane world, we are accustomed to making efforts in order to attain a certain result. In fact, no result comes without effort. A hungry person can only drop their search for food once they have eaten. Fasting will not fill their stomach. In spirituality, however, different laws apply. In spirituality, the act of dropping your hunger is the only thing that feeds you. The true state emerges when we have dropped everything, including our search, our efforts, and our own selves. Then, the Self manifests in its transcendental beauty—­the real beauty. In dropping your search, you become open to that which you seek. In dropping yourself, you become the very thing that you seek.”

Daaji paused. “Of course, to abandon all effort doesn’t mean that you stop meditating!” he said. “Meditate more and more, in fact. Dropping your search only means that you drop your searching attitude in meditation. You drop your effortful, insistent approach. Action is necessary in order to achieve anything.”

“And action is the key element in karma yoga,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “So we must meditate. We must practice. We must act. But our actions should be effortless. They should flow with ease.

“True effortless action only arises when we have been transformed from the inside out. On its own, the relaxation method cannot achieve this. However, the mental stillness that it produces triggers a greater receptivity to the divine impulse that is truly responsible for our transformation. You see, when we are filled with tension and worries, we tend to deflect the higher help that comes through transmission. By relaxing ourselves, we accrue greater benefit.”

“So the relaxation method is a kind of lubricant, which allows the real spiritual work to flow unhindered,” I said.

“Exactly,” said Daaji. “The purpose of relaxing the body prior to meditation is only to facilitate that divine work. When we are in a deeply relaxed state, our interference in the process is minimized, and we become more receptive. We become open to the subtle showers of transmission that soothe our meditative hearts.”



The relaxation method consists of a set of sequential suggestions that help us relax. It is best when used immediately prior to meditation, but we can use it whenever we feel the need. You can also help others to relax by reciting the suggestions to them, as Daaji did for me. There is no need to memorize these suggestions verbatim. By understanding the essence of the relaxation method, your own words may intuitively emerge. After some time, you won’t even require the method. You won’t need to go through the entire process in such a systematic way. Within the space of a single breath, you will be able to relax yourself completely.





Relaxation



Close your eyes very softly and very gently.



Let’s begin with the toes. Wiggle your toes. Now feel them relax.



Relax your ankles and feet. Feel energy from the earth entering the soles of your feet. Feel it move up your feet to your knees, relaxing the legs.



Relax your thighs. The energy moves up your legs … relaxing them.



Now, deeply relax your hips … stomach … and waist.



Relax your back. From the top to the bottom, the entire back is relaxed.



Relax your chest … and shoulders. Feel your shoulders simply melting away.



Relax your upper arms. Relax each muscle in your forearms … your hands … right up to your fingertips.



Relax your neck muscles. Move your awareness up to your face. Relax your jaw … mouth … nose … eyes and eyelids … earlobes … facial muscles … forehead … all the way to the top of your head.



Feel how your whole body is now completely relaxed. Scan from top to toe—­if any part of the body needs your attention, revisit it and ensure that it is relaxed.



Move your attention to your heart. Rest there for a little while … feel immersed in the love and light in your heart.



Remain still and quiet, and slowly become absorbed in yourself.



Remain absorbed for as long as you want, until you feel ready to come out.





How to Meditate


Having fixed a time and place and found a comfortable pose, we are now ready to meditate. We gently close our eyes and center our awareness in the heart, supposing that divine light is present therein and that it is attracting us inward.

“What does it mean to suppose that divine light is present in the heart?” I asked.

“It is a hypothesis,” said Daaji. “At first, we don’t know what is inside the heart. We are waiting to find out. Meditation is an experiment in which we test this hypothesis that divine light is present in our hearts. The proof of this experiment comes when we actually experience it, through feeling.”

“How do we conduct this meditative experiment?” I asked.

“We relax and gently allow our awareness to rest in the heart,” said Daaji. “Divine light is not a thought, but a feeling. This feeling cannot be manufactured. Therefore, we should not make attempts to think about it or to feel it. Meditation is really a form of waiting—­relaxed, patient waiting, without any expectation. Therefore, we do not repeatedly remind ourselves that ‘divine light is present in my heart, and it is attracting me inward.’ We don’t need to keep refreshing this idea. It’s not a mantra that we repeat: ‘Divine light is in my heart, divine light is in my heart.’ That would only disturb us. It would be artificial and effortful. Rather, the thought of divine light must disappear from our minds in order to give way to the actual experience of light in the heart. The object of meditation is something that we feel, not something to think about.”

“But the definition of meditation is to think continuously about one thing,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “And we are continuously and totally attentive to this idea, but it is a deeper attentiveness—­a nearly subconscious attentiveness. People tend to misunderstand this. If you try to hold it as a conscious thought, you are only concentrating. That is not meditation.”

“What triggers this deeper attentiveness?” I asked.

“Your intention to meditate,” said Daaji. “That is sufficient. You see, consciousness is vast. Most of it lies beyond our conscious awareness. The portion of consciousness of which we are aware is only a minute fraction of its totality. The thought of divine light pervades those deeper realms of consciousness that are beyond our awareness. So you do not need to wrangle with the thought of divine light at any conscious level. Even if this thought never occurs to your conscious mind, rest assured that you are still meditating.”

“So what do we actually do in meditation?” I asked.

“Simply relax into your heart-­centered awareness and wait,” Daaji repeated.

“This method is almost too simple,” I said.

“Reality is simple!” he replied. “And to achieve a simple thing, we must adopt simple means. Babuji used to say that it’s easier to pick up a needle with your fingers than with a crane!”

“If only I’d known how simple meditation is back when I first started,” I said.

“But you learned through experience,” he said. “That is the best way.”

“When I started, I was at a total loss as to how to handle this idea of divine light in the heart,” I said. “Whenever I asked questions, people would just tell me not to think so much! So most of the time, I just ignored the idea of divine light. And even without this thought, I still went deep into meditation. But on some days, I would think, Okay, today I’m really going to meditate properly. I’m going to think of divine light continuously. Those days, there was no meditation at all! It was only struggle.”

“The concept of divine light is extremely subtle,” said Daaji. “Babuji called it ‘light without luminosity.’ Now, this definition contains a big hint! At first glance, it can make us scratch our heads. Isn’t luminosity the defining characteristic of light? Yet, by removing luminosity from the picture, we learn something vital. We learn that divine light cannot be visualized or imagined in any way. It cannot be electric light. It cannot be candlelight. It cannot be daylight, neon light, or light from any material source. It is not something that we can see. So what is it? It is something that we feel .

“That is why we involve the heart in this process. The heart is the organ of feeling, after all. The attempt to think about divine light tends to get in the way of feeling it. It keeps us tied to the mental plane and prevents us from going deeper.

“So, we have to take this thought in a very subtle manner. At most, we gently remind ourselves that divine light is present in the heart and that it is attracting us inward, toward the Source. We do this once, in the beginning. And in fact, even that much is unnecessary. It is such a natural process. Everything happens by itself, you see.”

“Why not simply meditate on the Source?” I asked. “Why even bring divine light into this?”

“How would you conceive of the Source?” Daaji replied.

I had no answer.

“The Source is infinite,” he said. “It defies thought. It even defies unconscious thought. No matter how you conceive of it, it won’t be the real thing.

“Divine light, on the other hand, is graspable. It may be subtle, but at least we can experience it. We can feel it in our hearts. This subtle feeling pulls us further inward. It takes us beyond light, actually, and delivers us at the Source itself.”

“So the reason we meditate on divine light is that we cannot meditate directly upon the Source,” I said.

“Exactly,” said Daaji. “But that light comes from the Source, and it draws us toward the Source as well. In this process of approaching the Source, we go deeper and deeper into meditation. We achieve greater and greater depths of samadhi.”

“But let’s back up for a second,” I said. “It isn’t always the case that we close our eyes and immediately plunge into samadhi. Often, there’s a lapse of time in between. That is when people experience the most difficulty because they have to contend with so many distracting thoughts. So my question is: How should we handle our thoughts?”

“Yes, thoughts are the number one complaint,” he chuckled. “But to come with the expectation that, ‘I must have a thoughtless state’ is a wrong approach. We get carried away by these popular notions. Just as the ears are for hearing and the eyes are for seeing, the natural function of the mind is to think. When you are absorbed in a film that you’re watching, you are not disturbed by your thoughts. But that doesn’t mean that you don’t have thoughts.”

“You’re just inattentive to them,” I said.

“Right,” said Daaji, “because you are more attentive to the activity that you are witnessing on the screen. The same thing happens in meditation. When we are more attentive to the heart than to our thoughts, they no longer bother us. This becomes easier when you start to feel the presence of the light within. You may not be aware that what you are feeling is the divine light. You may hardly even notice when it comes, in the same way that you don’t notice the moment that you fall asleep. It just happens. Then, you’re no longer affected by thoughts.

“Thoughts and emotions are like waves on the surface of the ocean. They may disturb the sailor who stays upon the surface, but not the whale, which swims in the depths. In deep meditation, we sink into those depths. Even when a gale blows, it remains above the surface, and we remain unaffected.”

“But what do we do before we sink into deep meditation?” I asked again. “How do we handle our thoughts then?”

“Accept them,” he said. “Love them, even. Thoughts are not your enemies. If you fight with thoughts, you will surely lose! The more you fight with your thoughts, the stronger they become. In fact, we can bring in Newton’s third law here. In the physical dimension, every action produces an equal and opposite reaction. On the mental plane, that rule applies in an unpredictable way. There is still an opposite reaction, but it isn’t equal. It is disproportionate! It’s like throwing a stone into the ocean and getting a tsunami in return. So don’t fight with your thoughts. Just let them be.

“Of course, that doesn’t mean that you should indulge them, either. Often, we get pumped up by certain thoughts that impress us. We also get worried by our negative thoughts. Thinking is okay, but indulgence is never good. Really, thoughts should be like the wallpaper in a room. You may appreciate the beautiful print, or you may dislike it, but either way, it doesn’t obsess you. It doesn’t prevent you from carrying on with your activities. In the same way, your thoughts need not hinder your meditation.”

“But sometimes, thoughts seem to ambush us,” I said. “Then, it’s difficult to stay poised.”

“Babuji pointed out that when you pour wine from a bottle, it leaves from the same opening from which it entered,” said Daaji. “The thoughts we have in meditation are like wine flowing out of its bottle. They have been inside us all along, even if we weren’t aware of their presence. We only become aware of them when we’re meditating and they start coming out. Thoughts come only to leave, you see. So let them come.

“Sometimes, we experience really intense thoughts and emotions during meditation. They can be unsettling. The reason is that we tend to repress such thoughts and feelings in the normal course of our lives. You have thoughts that you think are bad, and you say, ‘No, no, no!’ and push them down into the recesses of your subconscious. That doesn’t get rid of them, though. They remain inside you, shading your experience and shaping your behaviors in subtle ways. In meditation, such thoughts resurface. They are like the air bubbles that rush upward in a pot of boiling water. Know that they are in the process of leaving you and pay them no mind.

“I am always happy when someone complains of a turbulent meditation because it shows that they have released something that they were harboring inside. So, I think that we should refrain from judging our meditative experiences. What is far more significant is the way that you feel after your meditation is complete—­not during. It is meditation’s long-­term effects that we are really after.”

“But how to handle a difficult experience in meditation?” I asked. “Like when your thoughts just run away with you.”

“Just remind yourself that you are meditating,” said Daaji. “That should be enough. If that doesn’t help, then open your eyes for thirty seconds or so. That will clear the condition. Then you can continue your meditation.

“A time also comes when we do enter into a thoughtless state. This happens when we go further into the subtler realms of consciousness. The great Swami Vivekananda once said, ‘Con­scious­ness is a mere film between two oceans, the subconscious and the superconscious’ (Vivekananda 2009). Let’s look at these two words: sub and super. By pairing the prefix ‘sub’ with the word ‘conscious,’ we see that the subconscious is beneath our conscious awareness. Conversely, the superconscious is above our conscious awareness. So the sub-­ and superconscious are both beyond our conscious awareness. Yet, one is a lower unconsciousness, while the other is higher.

“The subconscious is vast, as is the superconscious. In fact, both are infinite. Through yogic practice, our conscious awareness expands through both of them. When we sleep at night, we dive deep into oceans of the subconscious. Actually, this occurs through a special state of yogic sleep called yoganidra. We’ll discuss this later when we take up the subject of prayer. It is also necessary to purify the subconscious. The subconscious is filled with the remnants of past experiences. It’s also the home of our lower instincts and drives. We’ll also go into this subject more deeply when we discuss the cleaning method.

“Now, let’s discuss the superconscious. It is the godly realm, and in meditation, we soar into its endless skies. It is from there that wisdom descends. It is from there that inspiration strikes your heart. In the superconscious, we are suffused with energy from the Source.

“In meditation, our awareness expands through the superconscious. At first, we may not have any experience of this at all. It is as if we are in a state of deep sleep. That is the first stage of samadhi. But slowly, we become familiar with the superconscious. We become aware in that state, and gradually, we gain command over it. Then, is it still superconsciousness?”

“What do you mean?” I asked.

“When you are conscious of it, it’s no longer above your conscious awareness. It has become your normal state of consciousness. The superconscious is something that is always beyond. It is what you cannot access. What may be a normal state of conscious awareness for you may be a state of superconsciousness for someone else.”

“So it’s a relative term,” I said.

“Yes,” he replied. “We can also accelerate this process of moving into the superconscious state by using two supplemental practices called point A meditation and point B cleaning. But these practices are best explained in person by a Heartfulness trainer, after we have become established in the essential Heartfulness practices.

“In our journey, we also move beyond superconsciousness. In fact, we move beyond consciousness altogether. Consciousness is infinite, whether we are speaking of the subconscious or the superconscious. But that infinity is supported by another infinity, which we call potentiality .”

Daaji stood up and went into his bedroom. A minute later, he returned with a book in hand: Efficacy of Raja Yoga , written by Babuji in 1944. Daaji started to read:

Consciousness is not our goal. It is only a toy for children to play with. We have to reach a point where consciousness assumes its true form (i.e., what it really ought to be). We have to make a search for the mother tincture from which medicines are actually prepared. We are searching for the potentiality which creates consciousness, and if that too is gone then we find ourselves on the verge of true Reality, pure and simple. This philosophy is too high to be described adequately in words. (Chandra 2009)

Daaji closed the book. “And Reality is another infinity that supports potentiality,” he said. “You see, our development covers a spectrum that moves toward infinite subtlety. We begin with consciousness, move toward its potentiality, and eventually emerge into Reality. And we must go beyond that too … ”





How Long to Meditate


Before I began Heartfulness, I used to meditate for precisely twenty minutes at a time. I would set an alarm and sit with closed eyes until it rang. Perhaps I learned this from a meditation class that I had taken, where the instructor would ring a bell when meditation was over.

When I started practicing Heartfulness, I continued my habit of setting an alarm for twenty minutes. However, that “ring” soon started to disturb me because it would come while I was still immersed in meditation. So, I started setting the timer for one hour instead. But then, I found that I would naturally come out of meditation exactly five minutes before the bell would ring. Soon, it occurred to me that the timer was only interfering in the process, and I never used it again.

I told Daaji about these early experiences, and he said, “Yes, it’s too artificial to set any time limit in advance. In fact, we should never set any agenda in meditation. We shouldn’t impose any conditions at all. We have to be open, in a state of wonder and unknowingness.

“Sometimes we might think, I have to go to work soon, so I’ll just meditate for fifteen minutes. The Giver knows your time constraints very well. Perhaps, he would have finished your meditation in thirty seconds, but you’re insisting on fifteen minutes.”

“But in that case, I’m being more generous than the Giver,” I said. “He needs thirty seconds, but I am allowing him fifteen minutes.”

“Maybe,” said Daaji, “but what do you think will happen in those fifteen minutes? Instead of meditating on the endless, you will meditate on time, on limitation. You will be constantly aware that you have to stand up in a few minutes. You’re focusing on the quantity of meditation—­not the quality! If there is no quality, is there any use in quantity?”

“Sometimes when I meditate, I find that it’s over very quickly,” I said. “At other times, I find that an entire hour has gone by. What makes meditation complete?”

“It is complete when you have hit a satisfactory depth of consciousness,” said Daaji. “Babuji recommended one hour. When people complained, he reduced it to half an hour. But he said that an hour was best. He had observed that people often take that long to reach a satisfactory depth in meditation.

“But don’t run with this idea and say, ‘Okay, now I am going to meditate for one hour!’ In that case, you’ll still be meditating on the idea of time, and not on divine light. So forget time! Just meditate.”

“I’ve been told that Babuji never meditated for more than a minute or two at a time,” I said.

“He could instantly plunge into his inner depths,” said Daaji. “If that’s all the time you require, it’s sufficient. And if it takes you one hour, that’s also good.”

“What if you don’t achieve any depth at all?” I said. “Even in one hour.”

“Save it for next time,” said Daaji. “So it didn’t happen today. Fine. Try again tomorrow. Or, if you are really avid and you have some extra time, meditate a second time. But give yourself a little break. Take fifteen minutes, at least. Without this fifteen-minute break, meditation will create a slight negative effect.”

“What determines how quickly we can dive deep into ourselves?” I asked.

“It depends on the orientation of your awareness and the flexibility of your consciousness,” he said. “Imagine that consciousness is a big circle. Its center is the core of your being, the Ultimate Source. The circumference represents our surface-­level awareness. It’s our normal state of consciousness in which we interact with the world via the senses.

“Usually, our attention is unidirectional. It moves in one direction at a time. In meditation, it moves inward to the core. In our daily activities, it tends to move outward and away from the center. It flows through the senses in the direction of the circumference.

“If your consciousness is nimble and flexible, it can easily switch directions. But if your consciousness is cumbersome, it’s like a big cargo ship that requires four tugboats just to turn around. When we are accustomed to an external orientation, we tend to find it difficult to turn our awareness inward. Then, meditation takes a little longer. But with daily practice—­and with the help of transmission—­we develop a nimble consciousness, a flexible consciousness. Now, we can move in either direction, at will.

“However, as we develop even further, consciousness stops jumping back and forth, turning inward and outward. It stops being unidirectional. Rather, it expands in both directions at once. You are aware of what is happening around you externally. At the same time, you are moving toward the Source within. Furthermore, you are aware of what is happening in between the two. You have neither an inner nor an outer orientation. Your consciousness is expansive. Your attention is inclusive.

“When this is the case, meditation no longer involves any movement. You’re simultaneously immersed in the Center—­the Source—­and aware of the external. That means that you don’t have to turn your consciousness inward in order to meditate. In fact, meditation now becomes redundant. You are in a permanent state of meditation, you see. Why would you need to sit and meditate when you are already in meditation?

“You may have noticed that in Eastern iconography, spiritual figures are often portrayed in a meditative pose. We see this especially in depictions of Lord Buddha. He is always seated, always serene. In reality, though, illumined individuals do not sit in continuous meditation. They are active and engaged with life. One could be a busy emergency room doctor, for instance, busily attending to patient after patient. Despite her stressful situation, she is calm. She is peaceful. Her permanent contact with the Source provides her with an inner silence that pervades the surrounding noise. Despite her stressful circumstances, she is in meditation, you see. She may not be seated like a buddha figurine, but her consciousness is buddha-­like . She has attained permanence in meditation. This is called the meditative state.

“It should not be necessary to continue this daily exercise of meditation for your entire life. Each case is different, of course, but I think that if we still require this daily ritual after twenty or thirty years, something must be wrong in our approach.”

“So why are evolved individuals always portrayed in that meditative pose?” I asked. “Is it just a symbol?”

“Of course it is a symbol,” said Daaji. “Nevertheless, we also observe that even those who no longer require meditation still tend to maintain their meditation practice. Every morning, they still sit for meditation. Now, why would they do this? Is it because they enjoy it? Is it a habit? A formality?”

Daaji paused. “You can think over this.”





The Meditative State


“Your meditation should never end,” said Daaji.

His words punctuated a long silence. “Of course, this does not mean that you never get up again!” he continued. “You cannot remain seated in meditation all day, but you can remain in a meditative state throughout all of your activities. Your life becomes a meditation, you see—­a dynamic and ongoing one. It is meditation with open eyes. You are not seated in meditation. Yet, you are meditating.

“In India, we have a concept called Brahman. Traditionally, Brahman is akin to God. It is thought to be the Ultimate Reality, the Supreme Being, or whatever you may like to call it. Yet, if we examine the etymological roots of the word, we uncover a different story. ‘Brahman’ is derived from two Sanskrit roots: bruha and man. Bruha means ‘expansion,’ and man means ‘thinking’ or ‘contemplation.’ So Brahman literally means ‘that which expands and contemplates.’

“Let’s step back for a moment. Do you remember how I described consciousness as a big circle?”

“Yes,” I said.

“The center of the circle represents the deepest core of our being, and the circumference stands for our external awareness,” said Daaji. “A time comes when consciousness expands in both directions simultaneously—­toward the center and the circumference. That is Brahman in the true sense. It is expansion, but it is also thinking, because the mind—­which thinks—­exists within consciousness.”

“So most people think Brahman to be something other than what it really is,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “We have applied our human understanding to something that is beyond understanding. You see, one of the reasons that Socrates was executed was that he proclaimed the gods to be human creations. He observed that the gods, as they were presented, had human characteristics. Therefore, he concluded that they were human projections.

“While that was going on in Greece, the same thing was happening in India. It still is, in fact. And not just in India. It is a peculiar facet of human nature that we assign human qualities to everything, including God. You see, the Sanskrit word for individual being is atman. Atman literally means ‘that which moves and thinks.’ So you can see that the definition of an individual is very close to the ancients’ definition of God. The only distinction is that one expands, while the other merely moves.

“Why are they so similar? The reason is that people thought, ‘God must be like us, but greater.’ If the individual being is something that moves, then God—­being greater—­must expand, for expansion is greater than mere movement. So they took the Ultimate and named it ‘Brahman,’ according to their human understanding.

“In reality, Brahman is not the Ultimate. It is the state in which consciousness contemplates and expands. The Ultimate is far beyond this. The Ultimate is changeless, so it cannot expand, contract, or contemplate.”

“So in the meditative state, our consciousness exhibits the qualities of Brahman, ” I said, “ but that is not the Ultimate State.”

“Correct,” said Daaji. “We have to go beyond Brahman. And there is a term for that too: Parabrahman , which means ‘beyond Brahman. ’ And the state of Parabrahman is also just another stage in our journey. It is not the end. The meditative state keeps on evolving, you see. It grows finer and subtler until it dissolves into the Ultimate State. But it cannot evolve unless we create it in the first place.”

Daaji paused in reflection.

“I don’t think anybody will be truly satisfied with meditation until the effect becomes permanent,” he said. “Of what use is profound meditation if it doesn’t transform your daily experience? Otherwise, meditation is like drawing water from a well using a leaky bucket. You’re unable to retain it and carry it into your life.”

“How do we make the effects of meditation carry over?” I asked.

“The first step is to meditate,” he said. “Meditation is the mother of the meditative state. Without a mother, there is no baby, and without the act of meditation, there is no meditative state. We achieve permanency in meditation through repeated meditations. With daily meditation, you steadily build that meditative condition. Brick by brick, meditation by meditation, you build it. If you don’t meditate frequently, that condition starts to wane.”

“And then you have to create it all over again,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “It’s like a plant that requires daily water and sunshine. If you neglect it, you’ll have to keep resuscitating it. How will it flourish?

“But it is not enough to meditate. You must also bring that meditative consciousness into your wakeful awareness. This depends on the way in which we conduct ourselves in the minutes that immediately follow meditation. A fresh meditative state is like wet cement. It needs some time to settle before you can carry it into your day. If you just jump out of your chair the very instant meditation ends, that meditative state of consciousness becomes fractured. This is akin to throwing it away. It’s like working hard for a paycheck and then tossing it in the garbage! If you’re going to do that, then why meditate at all?”

“So what do you recommend?” I asked.

“After meditation, open your eyes very gently,” he said. “Then, remain in meditation for a few minutes more, but with half-­open eyes. This is very important. In those few minutes, you are not thinking about what you have to do today. You do not check the messages on your phone. You are still meditating—­but with slightly open eyes. Stay like this for a few minutes, until you feel totally present in your surroundings.

“Even then, move slowly at first. Remain still. Remain meditative. Anything jarring should be completely avoided. You have to be like a deep-­sea diver, slowly ascending from the watery depths. Nothing can be rushed! We should even refrain from drinking water immediately after meditation.”

“Why?” I asked.

“Whenever a person is upset, a drink of water helps calm them down,” said Daaji. “This shows us that water can change our inner condition. Now that may be good when someone is upset, but after meditation, we want to preserve the condition that we have. We don’t want to change it. So we avoid drinking water for a few minutes. Along these same lines, if we have meditated with a fan blowing on us, we should keep that fan on for some time. We shouldn’t immediately switch it off. And if it was off during meditation, it should stay off. Until that meditative condition is secure, we should do nothing that could possibly disturb it. Those first few minutes are critical. They determine the quality of your entire day.”

“What happens in these few minutes that makes them so important?” I asked.

“Your meditative consciousness merges into your normal waking state,” said Daaji. “By spending just a few minutes meditating with open eyes, your consciousness remains meditative as you adjust to the waking state. After a short while, the two states coexist. You are inwardly absorbed, and you are perfectly alert to your surroundings. This is one aspect in converting the act of meditation into a state of meditativeness.

“When we meditate, we acquire new inner conditions. Acquiring a condition is like signing a lease on a house. You may live there, but that doesn’t mean you own it. If you don’t own it, can you stay there permanently? You see, we have to find a way to make these conditions ours. Otherwise, it’s like trying to grasp a fistful of water. It just trickles through your fingers and disappears.”

“What is the best way to achieve ownership of a condition?” I asked.

“The first step is to be aware of our condition. We have to be aware that we have received something. The best time to develop this awareness is immediately after meditation. After meditation is over, simply observe yourself. Observe yourself minutely. How do you feel? Our condition can manifest in various ways. A journal can be an extremely useful tool because if you have to write about your condition, you will naturally be attentive to it. When you’re attentive, your awareness becomes more finely tuned and your sensitivity increases. Initially, many people say that they don’t know what to write. At first, you may only write one sentence, or even one word. But after a few weeks, you may write paragraphs. Soon, you’ll fill pages with detailed descriptions.

“The more awareness we have of our condition, the more we will be able to experience its depth and intensity. A new condition is like a seed. It starts in a very small way and gradually unfolds. It expands from within and becomes enlivened . Our entire being now seems to vibrate along with it. When the condition is sufficiently enlivened, it peaks. Then it takes a new turn. We now start to absorb it, you see. We imbibe it. It starts to become a part of us. As it becomes part of us, our thoughts, feelings, and actions start to reflect its particular characteristics. One interesting facet of this process is that the more we imbibe the condition, the less intense it becomes. Its feeling starts to wane, you see. Eventually, we stop feeling it altogether. Then, we might think that we have lost it! But if you examine yourself carefully, you’ll find that it is not gone. Instead of feeling it, you are becoming it.

“For example, look what happens when you eat a meal. Initially, you feel the presence of that food in your stomach. However, when the food is digested, you no longer feel it in your system. It is becoming a part of you. Similarly, the experience of any condition only proves that it has not yet become a part of you. It’s still foreign. It’s still a novelty. When it truly becomes a part of you, you are unable to experience it at all. As Babuji used to say, the eye cannot see itself.”

“It is itself,” I said.

“Exactly,” said Daaji. “In that situation, the condition is truly secured. It has become yours. You stay in this state of not feeling very much until your heart starts craving something new. That craving is what triggers the next condition.”

“And the entire cycle is repeated again,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “This entire process of enlivening, imbibing, and securing the condition must become second nature. After all, there are so many conditions to traverse on this journey. As we move along, we also find that each condition is finer and subtler than the last. Unless our perception becomes continuously finer, these superfine conditions will elude us altogether. Then we won’t be able to enliven them, to say nothing of imbibing or securing them by becoming one with them.”

“How can we make our perception more subtle?” I asked.

“It’s like learning a new language,” said Daaji. “Gradually, we pick it up, but only if we observe ourselves and pay keen attention to each condition as it comes. And I already described how we do that. But we have to start this habit at the earliest because at higher stages, the conditions are so subtle that they become almost impossible to perceive. If we cannot perceive them, they get stunted, and we cannot move forward. If, however, your inner senses have been progressively tuned over the course of your journey, you will be able to work with those superfine conditions. You will pass through them to still finer states, eventually arriving at the subtlest condition of all—­the conditionless condition.”

“Often, we get distracted in the hustle and bustle of life,” I said. “At those times, it can seem as if we lose the condition that we received in meditation. Can we get it back without meditating a second time?”

“You don’t need to meditate a second time,” said Daaji. “Just stop for a moment, close your eyes, and reconnect yourself to the heart. That automatically recalls your condition. Or, you can consciously recall what that condition felt like. By remembering it, we recreate it. In the morning, it might have taken you an entire hour to enter a state of deep meditation, but now, you can find yourself on the verge of samadhi in only a few seconds.”

“How is it that a condition that took an hour to develop can get recreated in just a few moments?” I asked.

“With your morning meditation, you have already forged the pathway,” said Daaji. “Now that the path is established, you need only to follow it. You just refer to your heart, and it comes. And the more you meditate, the easier this becomes.”





Meditation



Sit comfortably, in a place where you can meditate without noise or distractions, preferably at the same time and place every day.



Gently close your eyes. Center your awareness in your heart, supposing that divine light is present there and that it is attracting you from within. Relax into that awareness. You may even relax into a deeper state, beyond awareness.



Remain in meditation until you feel that it is complete. After meditation, slowly open your eyes. Remain in meditation for a few minutes more, but with slightly open eyes. Be still and observe how you feel. Note these observations in your journal. When you feel ready, you can stand up and go about your day.





4





Cleaning




T he cleaning method is the second core practice of Heartfulness. Its purpose is to free us from patterns of ­thinking, emotional reactivity, and behavioral tendencies. The results of cleaning are tangible and immediate. In my experience, using the method for even a few minutes can have profound effects. I have found that it can instantly change my attitude, lift my mood, and broaden my perspective. Over the years, it has often helped me disentangle myself from various thought patterns, strong emotions, and even compulsive behaviors.

One of the reasons that cleaning is so effective is that it addresses both the symptom and the cause. It not only frees us from the effects of mental and emotional complexity, but removes it by the root.

“How exactly does the cleaning method contribute to our transformation?” I asked Daaji.

“Let us understand the problem that we face,” he said. “We observe that when water flows continuously over the same ground, it slowly carves out a channel for itself. Eventually, it can become a rushing river. Similarly, when we repeatedly think about something, our thought carves a channel in our mind. Whenever our thought moves there, it deepens that channel, easing the way for our thought to flow there again and again. In this way, a single thought can develop into a tendency of thinking.

“Our minds contain an untold number of such channels. They form a vast and complex network. When our thinking is confined to these beaten pathways, it becomes narrow and repetitive. We become more particular in our tastes and hardened in our opinions. As thought begets action, our mental tendencies further develop into behavioral habits.

“A tendency has its own momentum. It cannot be broken so easily. Often, we have trouble diverting the mind from its tendencies. Their pull is too strong! Instead, we usually fight with them. But that’s like mud-­wrestling an oiled pig—­there’s no way to win! If you want to change yourself, you cannot focus on the thing you want to change. That only strengthens the very tendency you want to do away with. Many parents know this. When training young children, we often give them negative commands. In many ways, we say, ‘should not, do not, avoid this, avoid that.’ Does it work? It usually makes them more obstinate. It’s better to simply divert their attention. Rather than saying, ‘No chocolate,’ we say, ‘Let’s have this instead.’ Instead of focusing on the negative, we focus on the positive. Instead of resolving not to tell lies, we simply tell the truth. But when the tendencies are strong, this approach also fails.

“You see, we must tackle our problems at the deepest level—­the subconscious level. That is where the root of our problems lie. However, subconscious means ‘beneath consciousness.’ That means that the subconscious is largely inaccessible to conscious manipulation. We can change deliberate action—­but subconscious action? It is subliminal. It occurs beneath the scope of our awareness. When we are barely even aware of something, how can we possibly change it? This is the biggest hurdle that we face when trying to work upon ourselves.”

“So dealing with subliminal thoughts requires a unique approach,” I said.

“Absolutely,” said Daaji. “We do not generally realize the extent to which the subconscious affects our daily experience. We are unaware of its enormous influence and the way in which it drives our conscious awareness from moment to moment.

“But it is not a one-­way relationship in which our conscious thoughts are mere products of subconscious influences. Rather, the relationship is cyclic.

“One way to understand the interaction between the subconscious mind and our conscious thoughts is by comparing it to a garden. A conscious thought is like a seed, sown into the fertile ground of the subconscious. That seed then germinates in the subconscious. Eventually, it blossoms into our conscious awareness and becomes an enduring pattern of similar thoughts. Just as a single seed produces a tree from which thousands of new seeds are grown, a single thought can grow into a tendency of thinking, through which we produce thousands of new thought-­seeds. You can see how our consciousness can easily turn into a complex jungle!

“The cleaning method hits at the very root. It is not about understanding or consciously reprogramming our habits of thinking and behavior. Instead, it works directly upon the subconscious. It is like weeding a garden. Whenever we pull up weeds, we must be sure to pull them out by their roots. If their roots remain in the ground, the weeds will continue to sprout, over and over again. Similarly, whatever we have already planted in the subconscious will continue to sprout in the form of thoughts and emotions. Unless we deal with those roots, our attempts at transformation often lead to frustration.”

Daaji paused.

“We have now referred to Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras on a number of occasions. So far, we have spoken about each of the eight steps except for the first one: yama. Yama refers to the removal of unwanted tendencies. This is exactly what we achieve with the cleaning method. Through meditation, we create an inner environment where unwanted seeds cannot take root, but it is through the cleaning method that we fry up the existing seeds and pull out the complex root structures already embedded so deeply within.

“In yogic philosophy, thought-­seeds that have already been planted in the subconscious are known as samskaras , or impressions.”

“Does every thought end up taking root in the subconscious and becoming an impression?” I asked.

“It is the thought’s emotional content that gets planted—­not the thought itself,” said Daaji. “A samskara is your emotional memory. It is the emotion associated with that particular thought. We may not retain that memory at a conscious level—­we may not retain the existential memory—­but its emotional content certainly remains with us. Most of the time, that emotional content remains dormant. It’s hidden away in the subconscious. However, when we encounter a situation that resonates with that particular emotion, that emotional state gets triggered. This produces similar thoughts to the parent thought—­the thought with which the emotion was originally associated. When thoughts and emotions become repetitive, our reactions become habitual.”

“So our emotions create the samskaras that are planted in the subconscious,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji, “but every thought has some emotional content. How much emotion it contains is only a matter of degree. Even if the emotion associated with a thought is not particularly intense, that thought will have at least a positive or negative flavor to it. No thought is completely neutral—­to be completely neutral is to have no thoughts at all. That is a state of pure perception, of pure witnessing. The greater a thought’s emotional intensity, the stronger its subconscious influence. That samskara, or impression, would be stronger.

“We often associate thought with the mind, and emotion with the heart. However, I prefer to view it as a heart-­mind field because there can be no emotion without thinking and no thinking without emotion. With spiritual practice, however, a time comes when the heart becomes completely unbiased, when it has no likes or dislikes, no preferences or prejudice. That is when the mind transcends thinking and becomes a mere witness, perceiving reality directly. Until then, our thoughts affect our heart, and the heart’s activity produces thoughts in the mind.”

“What determines a thought’s emotional content?” I asked.

“The ego,” said Daaji. “The ego is our sense of self. It is the feeling of ‘I-­ness.’ To truly understand its role in creating impressions, you’ll have to permit me to digress for a moment and go into greater depth on this topic of ego.”

“Yes, please,” I said.

“Okay,” said Daaji. “The ego’s only motive is self-­preservation. It fears being extinguished, you see. Therefore, it constantly works to bolster itself, to increase itself.

“The ego is a funny thing. When someone asks where we feel things, we point to the heart. If someone asks where we think things, we point to the head. Where is the ego? It doesn’t really exist anywhere. Yet, it tends to dominate our lives.

“Since the ego doesn’t exist in any tangible way, it secures its position through what it considers to be its possessions. For instance, you buy a big house, and your ego declares, ‘I am this.’ It has measured and quantified itself through that particular possession. This is how it proves its existence to itself.

“However, ‘possessions’ doesn’t only mean material belongings. Rather, it refers to anything that the ego has claimed as its own. The ego says, ‘my nationality, my language, my culture, my body, my intellect, my ideology.’ It doesn’t matter whether something actually belongs to you or not. Does anything really belong to us? Even the soul is not ours! The ego appropriates. It identifies itself with something and feels a sense of ownership over it.

“Now, this feeling of ‘mine-­ness’ has a side effect. When we feel that something is ours, we develop expectations. ‘My business should be successful. My spouse should be attractive. My car should be luxury.’ You don’t care about another person’s business, spouse, or car. But when your ego is invested, you care very much. When our expectations are met or exceeded, we are happy, and we react positively. When they are unmet, we react negatively.”

“So without the ego’s involvement, there are no emotional reactions, and hence, no impressions,” I said.

“That’s right,” said Daaji. “The ego feels entitled to certain outcomes, based upon its sense of perceived ownership. Then it reacts accordingly, and we form impressions. Remember that a reaction is either positive or negative. It is either toward something or against something. Every reaction contains either like or dislike, attraction or aversion, desire or fear. There is no such thing as a neutral reaction because to be neutral is to not react.”

“So you’re saying that emotion comes from the ego?” I asked.

“Yes, emotion comes from the ego, but not feeling,” said Daaji. “Emotion has bias. It likes some things and dislikes others. Feeling, on the other hand, has no preferences or prejudice. It is generous and accepting because it comes from the heart. Subdue ego, and true feeling naturally emerges.

“These emotional reactions do not leave us unscathed. We always receive the brunt of our reactions. They affect our consciousness and manifest as emotional and psychological states.”

“And this happens because of points A, B, C, and D,” I said.



In the chest area, there are four points, which we call A, B, C, and D. These four points determine the exact effect that a reaction will have on us. Babuji discovered points A and B in 1945. Points C and D came to light more recently. Daaji says that even now, many facets of the subtle, spiritual anatomy are being revealed to us.

Daaji publicly revealed the locations of points C and D in 2015. He had already mentioned their existence to me in private, but not their locations. One day, I wrote him to find out where they are. He replied:

“Please locate them yourself and send your findings to me.”

After spending a day internally researching their positions, I drew a diagram of where I thought them to be, which I sent to Daaji.

He wrote back, saying, “Move them a bit toward the right, and it will be correct. But do not share this, or it will rob others of the joy of discovering something new!”

However, now that the positions of these points are public knowledge, they can be shared. To locate points A, B, C, and D, start at the base of the sternum, where the rib cage cavity begins. Measure one finger width down from the sternum (using your own fingers). Then go four finger widths to the left. This is the location of point B. Two fingers above point B is point A. Point C is on the bottom rib, directly below point B. Point D is two fingers to the left of point C, directly underneath the left nipple.



“The functions of these four points are critical,” Daaji said. “They are closely connected to the heart, and the heart is largely responsible for our mental and emotional state. Now, whenever we react to something with like or dislike, specific vibrations emerge at point C. You can actually feel them. I hope people will try to notice it. Now, depending on the intensity of our reaction—­and the nature of its vibrations—­a ripple effect is created. That ripple takes those vibrations from point C to either point A, B, or D.

“Point A is associated with material life, so whenever our reaction concerns a worldly like or dislike, the vibrations at point C ripple to point A. As a result, point A becomes disrupted.”

“What happens when point A is disrupted?” I asked.

“Suppose you see a beautiful apartment and say, ‘What a nice apartment,’” said Daaji. “That feeling of liking makes a rather light impression. As a result, the vibration at point C is also light, and its ripple effect to point A—­the seat of material desires—­is weak. But then, you brood over this thought and think, I would like to stay in this apartment. Now, the vibration at point C becomes a little stronger, and this is also reflected at point A. You brood over it even more and become insistent. I have to have this apartment! you think. Now that disturbance becomes very big, and your emotional state becomes extreme. You are now fixated on fulfilling that desire. You may also be worried about not satisfying it. In either case, you become restless and that restlessness robs you of your peace.

“Let’s look at point B. This point is associated with sexuality. Whenever we react according to the sexual urge, the vibrations from point C ripple to point B. This rouses a feeling of passion.

“Point D is the guilt point. When we ignore our conscience, guilt forms at point D. The effect of guilt is extreme heaviness in the system. Guilt arises not only because of our wrong actions but also because of our inactions. For instance, suppose that you’re a doctor and you see an injured person by the side of the road. Yet, you continue on your way. Let someone else help them, you think. The next day, you read in the newspaper that the person died. Nobody stopped to help them! I think that this guilt would haunt you all your life. The guilt arising from inactions is somehow more poignant than the guilt resulting from wrong actions.

“The vibrations that are present in points A, B, C, and D gradually settle, or condense, producing what Babuji referred to as grossness . These points can only handle so much grossness. They become saturated, you see. When these points cannot handle any more grossness, the grossness evaporates and lands at yet other points, which we need not discuss right now because it’s another subject altogether. However, the result is that we experience a cascade of psychological and emotional effects.”

“And the cleaning method clears these disturbances,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “As a result, our psychological profile normalizes, our emotions become balanced, and our mind ceases to fixate on that particular emotion.”

“What happens when we don’t have a method to clean ourselves?” I asked.

“Have you ever seen what happens to a field when it is left untended?” he asked.

“It becomes overgrown,” I said.

“And it eventually turns back into forest,” said Daaji. “When samskaras are not removed, they develop unabated. They continue to strengthen and even give birth to new samskaras.”

“How does this process occur?” I asked.

“Suppose that you are walking down the street one day and a stranger insults you. Does that insult affect you or not? It depends on you. One person laughs it off, but another person wants to fight. Somebody else might brood over it all day long. So we see that while certain people may react to a particular stimulus, others will not. Among those who do react, their reactions can be different—­even when the stimulus is the same. If each person can have a unique reaction to the same stimulus—­or no reaction at all—­can you pin the entire blame on that stimulus?”

“No,” I said.

“It is a combination of the stimulus and something inside you that prompts your reaction,” said Daaji. “Unless you are already predisposed to be affected by that type of stimulus, it cannot have any effect on you. That something inside you is your samskara.

“You see, for all mental and emotional states, there are primal and proximal causes. The primal cause is the inner influence, the subconscious influence that is already inside you—­your samskara. In this case, it represents a predisposition to react to the insult in a particular way. Suppose that the insult irritates you. The primal cause is the samskara, or impression, that causes you to become irritated. The proximal cause is the outer influence—­the stimulus. It is the spark that ignites the gasoline.”

“The insult,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “And it can be any stimulus. But no matter what that trigger may be, you will not react without one. Your samskara—­the primal, inner cause—­does not get triggered without an external stimulus, the proximal cause. Without a proximal cause, your irritation remains dormant. It is like a snake in the grass, lying silently and waiting for just the right moment, for just the right environment. Then, when a proximal cause comes along, that samskara roars to life. It rises up and becomes the catalyst for your reaction.

“You asked how samskaras develop. The answer is that new samskaras are built on the backs of old ones. Suppose, God forbid, that a snake bites someone. As a result, he develops a phobia of snakes. But really, that fear is not a fear of snakes. It is the fear of death in the guise of a snake . The snakebite is a proximal cause. It triggers his preexisting samskara to fear death. On top of that samskara, he now has a new one: the fear of snakes.

“The formation of samskaras is progressive, you see. New ones are offshoots of previous ones. It is like the process by which we learn. If you don’t know the alphabet, you can’t possibly read Shakespeare. If you don’t know some physics, you can’t understand Richard Feynman. Similarly, what we make of the world around us depends upon our previous experiences.”

“But not every impression comes as a result of our experiences,” I said. “For instance, in your example, a snakebite caused a person to develop a phobia of snakes. But phobias don’t always arise out of personal experience. A person can be afraid of snakes without ever having been bitten.”

“Some try to make sense of these things in a fantastical way,” said Daaji. “They’ll say that such a person must have been bitten by a snake in a previous life! But that is a lazy argument. For instance, so many people are afraid of flying. By the same logic, they must have been in plane crashes in previous lives. But airplanes have only existed for the last one hundred years! So that can’t be the answer. Phobias do arise from our experiences, but an experience need not materialize for it to feel real to us. For example, you can imagine a frightening snake and start to feel afraid. The snake isn’t real, but the emotion is. Your imagination triggers a very real fear of death. When that thought gets connected to your underlying fear, it automatically becomes a phobia. This isn’t only true of fear and phobias. When any thought becomes connected to an existing samskara, a new samskara can be formed.

“Samskaras are like trees. Let’s take the fear of death again. That is the tree’s trunk. From that trunk, new branches sprout. Those are your phobias. That tree is the sum total of all your impressions related to fear. It is a network of fear, a dynamic of fear in your consciousness.”

“And our consciousness is filled with many other kinds of trees!” I remarked.

“Yes,” said Daaji, “and from each tree, a new tree can grow. Ultimately, our consciousness can become a complex jungle! Each samskara takes up real estate in our consciousness. Our energies get completely tied up in these samskaric patterns. They dominate our thinking and guide our pursuits. As our samskaric jungle grows denser, our consciousness deadens. Its energies are tied up, its space filled.

“Earlier, we spoke about how the human system gets saturated with grossness.”

“Hardened impressions,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “Well, nature now intervenes and purges this grossness from our system through a process known as bhoga . Bhoga means ‘experience.’ In life, we undergo so many kinds of experiences. Yogic philosophy tells us that these experiences are only bhoga. They are effects of our past impressions, which we now must undergo in a tangible way.

“However, we generally react to this process of undergoing bhoga (or in other words, our life experiences). As a result of these reactions, we form fresh samskaras.”

“So the process is never-­ending,” I said. “We create impressions, they come to fruition as life experiences, and then we form new impressions from those experiences. It seems as if bhoga only perpetuates impressions, instead of freeing us from them.”

“We perpetuate them,” said Daaji. “When we feel as if we are suffering for no reason, we react. You see, we generally become confused and embittered when undergoing miseries. ‘Why?’ we ask. We complain to God, saying, ‘What the hell are you doing?’ These reactions not only create new impressions, but they also make us toxic from inside and deflect the grace that descends from above. Also, bhoga doesn’t only come in the form of suffering. Enjoyment is also a manifestation of bhoga. But remember: any reaction creates an impression!”

“So bhoga is only helpful if we don’t react to it,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “Then it is immensely helpful. That is the wisdom of remaining serene and cheerful under all circum­-

stances.”

He stood up and removed a book from his shelf. “See here,” he said. “Babuji writes: ‘The external help comes in the form of suffering caused by the wrongs done by others, against which the people generally poison their thought on account of their own ignorance. This is very improper because this action, having helped the process of purification, has in fact put you under a sense of obligation. When this is the case, the work done through an external agency, it may be any, has in other words rendered the function of a true friend’ (Chandra 2009).

“But we can’t condemn ourselves or others as having invited our fates, whatever they may be. We can’t point the finger and say, ‘You brought this on yourself by creating samskaras.’ I have actually witnessed examples of this, where people withhold help from a suffering person while saying, ‘I cannot interfere with nature.’ This is inhuman. It is our duty to interfere with peoples’ suffering, in order to relieve it. Even worse would be to mistreat someone while crookedly professing that you are helping to purify them! Then, there are also traditions in which people self-­castigate. This is a negative approach, which will certainly create more complexity in us. We don’t need to invite suffering. Yet, when suffering is unavoidable, we must be able to accept it warmly with a cheerful attitude.”

“Is this like the idea of karma, in which we are supposed to undergo the consequences of our past actions?” I asked.

“We actually undergo the consequences of our samskaras—­not of our actions,” said Daaji. “If you act without creating any impression at all, there will be no consequence. You will not partake of its effect in any way. It is only the samskara that causes this famous boomerang effect. For example, suppose that you purchase something, and later, you decide to return it. Without the bill of sale, you have no basis to collect a refund. An impression is like a cosmic bill of sale. It links our action to its result. Without the impression, that action can never return to us. Remember that bhoga is nature’s way of removing impressions. If there is no impression to remove, there is no bhoga to undergo.

“We should understand that the purpose of bhoga is not to punish or reward us. Nor does bhoga exist to teach us lessons. There is a famous story from the Mahabharata . The great warrior Bhishma was felled in battle. As he lay mortally wounded upon a bed of arrows, Lord Krishna approached him. ‘What has led me to such a death?’ Bhishma asked. ‘I have examined a hundred of my previous lives, and I see nothing that could be the cause of this fate.’

“‘Look beyond it,’ said Krishna.

“‘I cannot see beyond it,’ said Bhishma.

“‘But I can,’ said Krishna. ‘In one life, you were a prince. One day, you took a snake by its tail, spun it around, and threw it. It then fell on a thorny bush, where it died. It is the effect of that deed that you are facing now. That is why these arrows have become your deathbed.’

“Now, if the consequence of Bhishma’s action had come immediately, he would have understood the correlation between his action and its result. In that case, he could have learned something from it and corrected himself. But when so much time elapses between a cause and its effect, we are not aware of their relationship. We miss the causality at work. When this is the case, how can we learn anything from the experience?

“So nature is not trying to teach us lessons. It only frees us from the weight of our impressions so that our consciousness may remain pure and light.”

“Why does nature want to remove our samskaras?” I asked.

“Nature’s regulatory purpose is to keep its systems pure,” said Daaji. “When impressions settle in the subconscious, they form a vibratory buffer between consciousness and soul. Impressions do not touch the soul, but they form a layer around it. This causes us to remain isolated from the inner Source. This situation represents an imperfection in nature.

“But nature’s process of bhoga grinds along slowly. Through bhoga, impressions are removed individually, and we have to undergo the effects of each one. This takes time, and we suffer a lot in the process. Meanwhile, we add new impressions at a faster rate than the old ones can be removed!

“Our impressions are also too numerous to be exhausted over the course of a single lifetime through bhoga alone. That is why so many Eastern spiritual traditions insist that one lifetime is not enough to free us from their effects. But when we remove impressions in bulk through cleaning, the entire load can be wiped out with a portion of this very life.”

“In the yogic literature that I’ve read, I’ve never come across any method for removing samskaras,” I said. “Instead, the focus seems to be on replacing negative samskaras with positive ones.”

“Samskara is impurity,” said Daaji. “Can there be good impurity and bad impurity? There is only impurity. A good person’s samskaras compel them to perform good deeds. A bad person’s samskaras compel them to perform bad deeds. Are these two people so different from one another? Both are in chains. The only difference is that one chain is golden, while the other is wrought of iron. Whether a chain is made of iron or gold, it binds us just the same. That is why we do not differentiate between good and bad samskaras. The Heartfulness cleaning method also does not discriminate. Whether good or bad, everything goes.”

“Does this mean that we have no free will?” I asked. “Are we simply at the mercy of our samskaras?”

“Not at all,” said Daaji. “We certainly have free will, and in fact, that is our problem! You see, we always retain the freedom to follow our hearts’ pure signals or to ignore them and surrender to the pull of our samskaras instead. That is our choice, and so the responsibility is also ours.”

“So there are two aspects to handling samskaras,” I said. “One is to remain connected to the heart and not react to the samskaric pull. The other aspect is to remove samskaras through the cleaning process or by undergoing bhoga.”

“Yes,” said Daaji. “And through cleaning, we remove the impressions in bulk, as opposed to bhoga, in which they are removed individually. Furthermore, cleaning removes impressions before they can manifest as experiences. To remove them without having to undergo them is like having an operation under anesthesia. We don’t experience it at all.

“An even deeper cleaning occurs when we meditate along with a Heartfulness trainer. In fact, the foundation of our samskaric edifice is completely removed in our very first sitting with a trainer. No edifice can stand without an intact foundation. It is bound to collapse, sooner or later.

“In this process of purification, our role is to perform our own individual cleaning at the end of each day. By doing so, we remove that particular day’s worth of samskaric accumulation. By continuing to take regular sittings with a trainer, we can exhaust our samskaric load within a portion of our life.

“Yet, despite the fact that we clean our samskaras day by day and take sittings a few times per month, the load won’t get any lighter unless we also stop creating new impressions. Otherwise, it’s like bailing out a leaky boat without bothering to repair the hole.”

“And that means being nonreactive,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji.

“How can we become nonreactive?” I asked.

“Meditate,” said Daaji. “In meditation, we learn to ignore our thoughts. We do not entertain them, nor do we fight with them. They are like mere dreams passing before us. When we become as nonreactive in the waking state as we are during meditation, we cease forming impressions altogether. Then real freedom dawns. We do not have to try to remain meditative because there is nothing inside us to react to so many external stimuli. We move from instinct to intuition, from the subconscious to the superconscious, from the reactive mind to the responsive heart.”





Doing the Cleaning


The cleaning method is a valuable tool with many practical applications. It helps us go beyond our personal limits and prevents us from getting tripped up in life’s overwhelming complexity. There are so many occasions when the cleaning has saved me from making big mistakes in life. Just a few minutes of cleaning allows for so much clarity and wisdom to dawn.



“I think that the cleaning method is possibly the most important of all the Heartfulness practices,” said Daaji. “Chariji used to say that meditating without cleaning is like having a fancy car that’s stuck in the mud. A supercar won’t do you much good without a decent road! Similarly, no matter how much you meditate, you won’t get very far without cleaning, because the beautiful inner state that you create will remain covered by so many layers of impurity.

“Nevertheless, we should never think ourselves to be impure or unclean. With the cleaning method, we move toward purity without ever thinking ourselves to be impure. We move toward simplicity without ever thinking ourselves to be complex. Beneath our samskaras, we are already pure and simple! Impurity never touches the soul, you see. It only obscures it and prevents its divine rays from illuminating our consciousness. When that is the case, our awareness diminishes. We become less cognizant. We only have to remove impurity and complexity, and our natural state of purity and simplicity begins to emerge.”

“So we should just do the cleaning as a matter of routine,” I said.

“Correct,” said Daaji. “Do it in the same spirit that you take a bath or shower—­as a habit of good hygiene. To bathe or brush your teeth is a matter of outer hygiene. The cleaning is all about inner hygiene. It makes your consciousness crystal clear.”

“When you say impurities, you mean samskaras, right?” I asked.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “But this is all within the realm of theory and philosophy. When you actually do the cleaning, you feel so light afterward. You feel so fresh. It is a tangible feeling. That feeling motivates you, regardless of whether you are convinced by the theory of samskaras or not. I think that the feeling of lightness is the reason that most people use this method. They feel a difference in themselves, which they appreciate.

“Over time, we also find changes in ourselves. Many habits and tendencies simply drop off. Sometimes, you don’t even notice that they are gone. Then somebody says, ‘What happened to you, man? You used to be so irritated all the time.’ ‘Oh, really?’ you say. You don’t even remember it.

“Normally, we perform the cleaning for fifteen to thirty minutes in the evening. However, there are times when we shouldn’t wait until the end of the day. Perhaps you get in an argument, or you see something that leaves you shaken. In such cases, sit down and clean immediately—­even if just for two to three minutes. See, if you spilled ketchup all over your shirt at lunchtime, would you wait until evening to clean it or to change your clothes? You wouldn’t. It’s the very same thing. Don’t carry around that stain on your consciousness all day. Don’t carry that heavy burden unnecessarily. Take care of it immediately. If something extreme happens and you feel very disturbed, contact a Heartfulness trainer and request a sitting. They’ll meditate along with you, aiding you with yogic transmission.

“When we take a sitting with a trainer, they perform cleaning on us as we meditate. The cleaning we receive from a trainer is a deeper cleaning than what we achieve during our daily individual practice. When receiving a sitting, we simply meditate and let the trainer do their own work. We do not use the cleaning method at that time because the trainer is already doing it on our behalf. But when we use the cleaning method on our own, we avoid meditating at that time. We just do the cleaning, as per the method.”

“How can we be sure that we are cleaning, rather than meditating?” I asked.

“In meditation, you can just let yourself relax deeper and deeper into it,” said Daaji. “But cleaning is a more active process. In cleaning, we use the will to throw everything out, so when we sit for cleaning, we must remain alert.

“But the best thing is to avoid creating impressions in the first place!” Daaji said with a laugh. “Certain situations are bound to create samskaras—­an argument, for example. Before the argument starts, you already know what’s going to happen. You know that you won’t like what the other person says. That’s when you need awareness. Before the difficult conversation even begins, inoculate yourself with compassion and understanding toward the other person. But you also have to understand yourself! You know how you are likely to react, so put a check on yourself at that time.

“Normally, we think that cleaning is curative in nature. You use it to clean yourself and normalize your inner state. But cleaning can also be preventative. Once, in the eighties, I was working in my first pharmacy in New York. At that time, there was an intern working with us who was a newly married man. He had recently started meditation, too. One of his duties was to deliver medicines to nursing homes and hospitals, where he would meet the nurses who would then distribute the medications to the patients. One day, he came back with a red face. ‘Kamlesh, I am in big trouble,’ he said. ‘What happened?’ I asked. ‘This nurse is after me. She is gorgeous! She is so beautiful! My heart is pumping, but I’m married. I should not even be thinking about it, but I want to meet her. See, she has given me the key to her apartment. I am supposed to see her tonight.’

“I said, ‘I am sorry, I cannot help you.’ Too many things were going on at that time, you see. But then I had an idea. ‘Let’s write a letter to Chariji.’ He said, ‘By the time I write the letter and it comes back, it will be too late—­she is expecting me tonight!’ At that time, the fax machine was a new thing, so I told him, ‘Okay, write the letter, and we’ll fax it to him.’ It was daytime in New York, so in India, where Chariji was at that time, it was the middle of the night. However, he would sleep with the fax machine right next to the bed. So, this intern wrote a letter. ‘Please help me. I am not able to resist this.’ Almost instantly, the reply came back: ‘Sit down and do the cleaning for five minutes. Then refer to your heart.’ So I said, ‘Go to the office and do it there.’ So he went, finished his cleaning, came back, and said, ‘Kamlesh, I shouldn’t have written that letter.’ I asked him why not. He said, ‘Now the desire is gone, and I will have to miss the opportunity!’

“You see, when we clean, desires get weakened and clarity dawns. If he had met that young lady, he would likely have formed strong impressions and ended up feeling guilty. So cleaning is also preventative.

“Now suppose you’ve had a stressful day at work. By the time you arrive home, you’re already in a reactive state. Maybe your wife has also had a tough day, so she’s also reactive. What do you think is going to happen when you interact? Fireworks! So the best thing to do is to clean that baggage away, first thing. Do it as soon as you reach home, and your interactions will be more peaceful, more loving.

“You know those children’s toys … tops? When a top spins on its axis, it’s not easy to knock it over. You can only knock it down when it’s already unbalanced, when it’s already wobbling on its axis. Most often, this is our condition when we come home in the evening. We’re already wobbling on our axis. So before we have a chance to react, we stabilize ourselves by doing the cleaning. Otherwise, it’s like returning home sweaty from the gym and immediately hugging your family! No matter how much they love you, they’d definitely prefer you to take a shower first! After you do your cleaning, you’re fit to interact with others, both for your sake and for theirs. You see, we have to be careful with others. My actions and attitudes should not create impressions in other people. This is especially true if they don’t have a method by which to remove samskaras. We have a method of cleaning ourselves. If we create a samskara, we can remove it. That isn’t true for others. If they form an impression, they don’t have an easy way of removing it.

“We can even help others simply by doing our own cleaning. Many of our samskaras are collective samskaras. For instance, family members often display common tendencies and traits. These are the result of shared samskaras. Now, by cleaning that particular samskara from yourself, you weaken it in the others, too. Removing your own part of a collective samskara is like removing the bottom layer of a mountain. Eventually, the entire formation will crumble and collapse.”

“So when we clean ourselves, we are also cleaning others,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji, “but indirectly. Now, just imagine if millions of people did cleaning. You would start to witness very rapid change in the world!”





Cleaning



Sit in a comfortable pose with the intention to remove all the impressions you have accumulated during the day.



Close your eyes. Imagine that all the complexities and impurities are leaving your entire system.



They are flowing out behind you, from the area between your tailbone and the top of your head.



Feel that they are leaving you in the form of smoke or vapor.





Remain alert. Gently accelerate the process with confidence and determination, applying your will as needed. If your attention drifts and other thoughts come to mind, gently bring your focus back to the cleaning.



Continue this process for approximately twenty to thirty minutes. You will know that it is finished when you start to feel a subtle lightness in your heart.



Now suppose that a current of purity is coming from the Source and entering your system from the front. This current is flowing throughout your system, carrying away any remaining complexities and impurities.





Let this continue for a minute or two.



You have now returned to a simpler, purer, and more balanced state. Every cell of your body is emanating simplicity, lightness, and purity. Finish with the conviction that the cleaning has been completed effectively.





5.





Prayer




T he third main practice of Heartfulness is a specific prayer that we offer twice per day. However, we can also offer our own prayers at any time, according to our heart’s inspirations.

Prayer is spirituality’s beating heart. Amidst so many spiritual ways, prayer represents a commonality. Although its practice and purpose may take different forms, prayer remains an essential way to connect with something higher than ourselves. If we approach prayer with just the right attitude, it transcends itself and becomes a way of being —­a permanent, prayerful state that pervades all our activities.

While walking with Daaji in the woods, I asked him a question: “What is prayer?”

“It is the inner cry of the heart,” said Daaji. “The heart’s feeling cannot be manipulated by the logical mind. Generally, we pray when we lack something. To pray under dire circumstances when we can bear no more is natural. But when we are happy and overjoyed, that feeling also becomes a prayer if we connect ourselves with God at that moment and express gratitude. In this situation, you are not asking. You are only sharing your joy, just as you would share your sorrow with an inner cry.”

“But in many cases, prayer is asking,” I said.

“This is due to our fears and desires,” said Daaji. “Because of our fears, we seek divine protection and because of our desires, we seek a divine provider. This gives rise to a conception of a God who fulfills both of these functions. Viewing God as our protector and provider, we pray accordingly. ‘Oh Lord, please protect me from illness,’ or ‘Dear God, please bless me with a job.’ Thus, each person views God according to the particular kind of help that they need. For example, a weak person sees God as the giver of strength, and a sick person sees God as the giver of health. But God is none of these. These conceptions are merely projections of our own needs. This is one of the reasons that Lord Buddha never spoke about God. His idea was that if you could cut fear and desire, all our fantasies about God would disappear in one stroke. He was correct in his view. Until that happens, our ideas of God are mere fancies.”

“Then what is God?” I asked.

Daaji laughed and said, “Someone once came to Babuji with a question. ‘Can you show me God?’ What was Babuji’s reply? ‘Supposing that I showed Him to you, how would you know that it was God?’

“It’s like a small child who asks their mother, ‘Where did I come from?’ The mother only says, ‘You will know one day.’ Such things are revealed at an opportune moment, when we are ready.”

“If to perceive God we must move beyond the shackles of imagination, then isn’t using the masculine gender to refer to God a form of limitation as well?” I asked.

“It’s a term with which everyone is familiar,” said Daaji. “It is not a description of God. God is beyond description. Neither masculine nor feminine, God has no name, form, or attribute. Really, it’s impossible to speak about God without telling a lie.”

After we had walked a little further, he said, “I’ll tell you a story that Babuji often narrated.”

Daaji proceeded to tell the tale of an ascetic monk who went to seek alms from a king. Arriving at the king’s palace, the ascetic was informed that the king was occupied in prayer. However, since the ascetic was a holy man, he would be allowed to sit with the king as he prayed. The ascetic was led to the prayer room. Noticing the arrival of a holy man, the king turned to the ascetic and welcomed him but asked for his patience, as he had not yet completed his prayers. The ascetic sat with him, quietly observing.

“Oh Lord,” prayed the king, “please grant me victory over my enemies. Grant me more territories, make my kingdom wealthy, and make me a great king.” The king continued in this manner for a few minutes, when all of a sudden, the ascetic stood up and started making his way to the door.

“Wait!” said the king. “You have only just arrived. Why do you now take leave?”

“Your Highness,” said the ascetic to the king, “I had come to beg alms from you, but now I see that you are a beggar, just as I am. So I will go and beg from the one from whom you are begging!”

“To grovel on our knees seeking blessings and benefits is a somewhat crass affair,” said Daaji. “We can equate praying for personal enrichment to a situation in which a person marries for money. The relationship is cheapened. It matters little whether the benefits we seek are material or spiritual in nature. In both cases, such an approach would be against the heart’s etiquette.

“For example, some people approach the Ultimate for fear of being condemned to hell. Others approach Him out of temptation for the heavenly abode. But to seek any return on love is sacrilege. In so doing, we damage our relationship with our Maker. At best, it becomes like a business relationship, and at worst, it is bribery. This is why the notion of ‘love for love’s sake’ has been so highly extolled. A true lover of the Lord has no ulterior motives. They care nothing for heaven or hell, for blessings or spiritual advancement. They are content with love. Do not ask for mere gifts when you can have the Giver. Only love can make this possible.

“Suppose, for instance, that you give a gift to someone you love. You think and think about what would suit them best. You buy it and lovingly wrap it. However, when presenting it to your loved one, that person snatches it out of your hands, rips off the paper, and rushes away with it—­all without any acknowledgment. How do you think that would make you feel? They accepted your gift while ignoring its giver. Well, if you really love that person, you won’t mind at all. However, they have missed the point of your gift.

“To give is an act of love, and as such, its purpose is to bring the giver and receiver together. A blessing has no meaning if it doesn’t lead to a state of intimacy with the Giver. As another example, take the case of a person who endears himself to a rich relative in order to become their heir. He may get the inheritance, but he also loses a lot in the process! The sanctity of the relationship is ruined.

“If you truly seek the Giver, then forget about gifts. Forget about blessings. Forget about spiritual attainment. They will come in their own way; they should not preoccupy us. Anyway, when He is in your heart, for what could you possibly want? That is why some people pray only for Him .”

“What makes Him respond to such a noble prayer?” I asked. “What makes Him offer himself to us?”

“He is always offering Himself!” said Daaji. “It is His nature to do so. At the same time, we observe that even though His blessings, His transmission, and His grace are always available, there is a big difference between a drizzle and a torrential downpour.”

“Then what is it that allows Him to pour Himself into us, rather than to bless us in drops and trickles?” I asked.

“Babuji quoted one poem,” said Daaji. “O, thou thirsty for the divine intoxication! Empty thy heart for the purpose, for the head of the bottle of wine bows down only over an empty cup” (Chandra 2009).

“So we must be empty in order to be filled,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “When our hearts are already full, what space is there for anything else? Rather, we must create a vacuum in our hearts. A vacuum attracts. You know how rain is created?”

“It comes when there’s low atmospheric pressure,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “It creates a vacuum, and when there is a vacuum, the surrounding air gets sucked in, and it rises. Condensation forms, and then the rains fall. So if you seek a divine downpour, you must create a low-­pressure system in your own heart. This means that your heart must be empty, divested of all desires for gifts, blessings, and attributes. Then, an inner vacuum is created. This automatically attracts the divine downpour that you seek. And when the vacuum in your heart is total, the Ultimate takes up residence there. He cannot avoid it.”

“But a vacuum need not attract only good things!” I said.

Daaji laughed. “True,” he said. “If the heart has even one little desire, a vacuum can attract trouble. The heart may be infinite, but the presence of a single desire can infinitely fill its space. In that case, the heart seeks its fulfillment in the mundane. Immediately, the world rushes in, and the vacuum is spoiled. A little carelessness and one is sure to pay the price! To have a vacuum in the heart is good, but only if the heart is oriented toward the Higher.”

“So when you say ‘inner vacuum,’ you mean a desireless state,” I said.

“It’s more than that,” said Daaji. “It’s a total lack of oneself. You see, Plato said, ‘Know thyself,’ but Babuji had a different idea. He said, ‘Forget thyself!’

“After all, Lord Christ said that it is the simple and meek who reach heaven. Normally, we take this to mean that they reach heaven after death, but the fact is that into such hearts that are simple, innocent, and egoless, heaven descends automatically. Wherever such individuals go, they create heavens around them.

“But when the heart is already perfectly content, what further contentment could heaven bring? In yogic terminology, this state of perfect contentment is called uparati . In uparati, we desire nothing in this world, nor do we wish for anything in the next. You see, we usually understand contentment as the satisfaction of a desire. For instance, if you eat a five-­course meal, could you want anything more? You are filled up! However, that is not uparati because tomorrow you will be hungry again. Rather, true contentment is to have no desires to fulfill. You become free from them. Previously, you were their slave. You worked continuously for their fulfillment. Now you are free. So this also tells us what the opposite of contentment is!”

“Yes,” I said, “to be tormented by desires!”

“And it is according to these desires that most of us pray,” said Daaji, “like the king from Babuji’s story. And the desires that we aim to fulfill tend to be of four specific varieties. In the yogic tradition, these four aims are known as artha, kama, dharma, and moksha . These aims are also associated with points A, B, C, and D, which we spoke about previously, in the context of cleaning impressions.

“First, let’s speak about artha, which is the desire for material fulfillment. This is a natural urge, covering our most basic needs: food, clothing, and shelter. But it can also manifest as a tendency to accumulate more and more. We buy clothes, houses, cars, electronics—­you name it. Now, whether we are preoccupied with the latest smartphone or we are worried about paying the bills, it creates samskaric vibrations that ripple to point A.

“But with meditation, our external, material focus gets diverted inward—­not completely, but to the necessary extent. As a result, we no longer feel the need to seek contentment outside ourselves. We have found it within! Now, we cannot worry so much about our problems either. Our perspective widens, you see.”

“And so our prayers no longer reflect that outward tendency,” I said.

“Right,” said Daaji. “Meditation transforms us totally. This transformation manifests in many ways.

“The next kind of desire is for sexual satisfaction, which is known as kama. The desire for kama forms impressions that settle at point B, creating passion.”

“In just about every religion, there seems to be a tradition of celibacy,” I said. “Should we avoid satisfying kama-­ based desires? Do you advocate that people reserve sex for procreation, for instance?”

“I’ll share one incident with you,” said Daaji. “Once, when I was traveling in north India, an old man came to see me with a burning question. ‘Why is it that every time I have ever had sex, I felt guilty afterward?’ he asked. ‘Precisely because you only satisfy yourself and have never once thought about the other,’ I said.

“You see, guilt only comes when we have been selfish. It does not matter what that selfishness is about. It could be sex, or it could be anything else. When you take the New York City subway, for instance, and rush ahead of an elderly person to take a seat, could you possibly feel good about it? Whenever self is predominant, you feel guilty. But when the opposite is the case, when your attitude is altruistic, you find a mystical joy bubbling up in your heart. Altruism is natural. When the dog barks to warn the sheep against the wolf, is it not an act of altruism?

“To take advantage of others, to turn another person into an object for the sake of one’s own pleasure produces guilt. Compare this situation, if you will, to a devotee who lovingly worships the statue of a goddess. Love can turn a mere object into a worshippable goddess. That is the choice: convert an object into a goddess or convert a goddess into an object! One is selfless, and the other is selfish. One is ennobling, while the other leads to guilt. Do you want to know the secret of transformation? It is only by ennobling others that we ourselves become ennobled. To degrade another person is to degrade one’s own self. And to ennoble another person doesn’t mean that you are helping them become ennobled. It means that you recognize their innate nobility and revere that. We can pray all day and night for transformation, but it will not come until we approach others with respect, dignity, and a holy reverence.”

“You said that the end result of kama-­based desires is a feeling of passion,” I said. “What is passion?”

“It is to be fixated on one thing,” said Daaji. “Let us compare two words: passion and compassion. In passion, you are fixated on possessing the person who is the object of your desire. You are more concerned with your own satisfaction than with the other person’s feelings. In compassion, on the other hand, you sacrifice yourself for the sake of the other. Passion leads to guilt, but in compassion, you become ennobled. You become joyful. Do you want to know how to attract grace? Be joyful. That is the prescription. What can grace achieve? A single downpour of grace can accomplish what a thousand transmissions can never do, what a thousand blessings can never achieve. So be compassionate, and you will be joyful. Be joyful, and grace will rain down upon you.

“When you are loving, caring, and compassionate with others, you are not trying to get anything from them. You do not manipulate others. You see, the reason that most people like to receive is because they feel incomplete. But though they receive and receive, they are never complete. Wholeness only comes by giving, and the only real gift is of one’s own self. So give of yourself. Then you will find that you are receiving much more than you could ever possibly give. How to give all of this away? you will wonder. You cannot. You can only continue to give.

“However, generosity of heart does not only mean giving. It is not only about helping others. Real generosity is to accept others’ opinions and differences without any vengeful feelings.

“This brings us to dharma, which is the next category of desire. Actually, I do not feel that dharma should have any connection to desire. Dharma’s literal meaning is ‘that which upholds.’ That which upholds what? That which upholds righteousness. And we are the ones who must uphold it! To wish for dharma is weakness. To pray for dharma is like praying that you don’t rob someone’s house. It’s easy—­just don’t do it! If you want dharma in your life—­if you want truth and goodness and love—­you must be the first one to uphold it. If not you, then who else? So there is no use wishing for dharma. There is no use waiting for dharma. There is no use praying for dharma. You have to be its embodiment. This is dharma’s dictate: love all and hurt none. It is also the heart’s very nature. You see, we have to cultivate a heart-­based understanding of dharma. Too often, our sense of dharma is rooted in our ideologies. The heart’s nature is universal, but ideologies are limited. They are the result of our cultures, of our religions, of so many other things. These varying ideologies give rise to differences, dislike, and even hatred. Such impressions take hold at point C, where they petrify into prejudice, which Babuji described as the enemy of spirituality.

“In the Indian tradition, divine personalities known as avatars are thought to descend in order to restore dharma, in times of intense degradation. Should such a thing really be necessary? Upholding dharma is always something that we would rather thrust onto someone else’s shoulders. If we had done our duty to uphold it on our own—­without expecting the Lord to descend—­we would have saved him a lot of trouble!

“And when we don’t uphold dharma? It is not as if we are punished. Rather, we punish ourselves. We bear that burden of guilt. Guilt has a special location in the human frame, which we spoke about earlier. It sinks to point D, where it weighs us down. Our hearts close, and our spiritual expansion is arrested. So we must avoid doing anything that will make us feel guilty. There is no external moral authority. The conscience is the only real judge. But the conscience is also stricter than any external judge, and it has the power to punish us far more severely.

“Moksha is the next category of desire for which people strive and pray. In India’s religious traditions, moksha generally refers to the state of liberation from the cycle of death and rebirth, and it is often hailed as the highest goal of life. In fact, moksha is a comparatively minor achievement. There is much, much more beyond it.

“Compare the wish for moksha, an emancipated existence in the realm of liberated souls, to the wish to be financially independent, a carefree worldly existence. Are the two wishes so different from one another? In both cases, you seek freedom—­a freedom that comes with a change in your circumstances.”

“So the desire for material wealth and the desire for spiritual liberation are similar?” I asked.

“They both create vibrations at point A,” said Daaji. “Thus, the desire for liberation is counterproductive. It weighs us down, rather than lightening our heavy load. The desire for moksha represents an escapist urge, based upon our negative experiences with the world. For instance, if you eat at a restaurant and the food upsets your stomach, you will probably never want to go there again. Similarly, when we get fed up with the world, we start to become averse to it. Then, you are like a prisoner who wants to break free from his cell. It is not a positive aspiration.

“We also pray for moksha because we think that this liberated state will free us from our slavery to the other three categories of desire. It doesn’t. There are many persons among us who have already qualified for liberation, yet they still hanker after artha, kama, and dharma. And they also pray for them. Wouldn’t it be better to pray for contentment? But if you meditate, why would you need to pray for contentment? It comes by itself!

“And when you are content—­when you are already a saint and have no desire for dharma, kama, artha, or moksha—­then what will you pray for?”

Daaji paused.

“Whereas you used to pray for yourself, you now start praying for others . Of course, this does not mean that you should wait until you become a saint! Even now, you should pray for others. It is not as if prayer can be diluted with the addition of more and more beneficiaries. Rather, it will create an even bigger wave.

“On the other hand,” he said, “the notion that you can include others in a selfish prayer is contradictory. Suppose that there is a flood in your area. Your heart says, ‘Please, God, keep my house from flooding,’ but while praying, you amend that sentiment and say, ‘Please, God, keep our neighborhood from flooding!’ Now, you’re confusing God. Your words say one thing, but your heart tells a different story. Is it possible to make up for a selfish prayer by including your neighbors in it? I don’t think so. The wrong key can never open the right door! Altruism cannot be an afterthought. It must be your original intention.

“In prayer, our intentions speak much louder than our words. It is your duty to pray for others, no doubt, but without love, duty is always a burden. Your friend asks you for a favor, and though you say yes, you curse him under your breath. Let’s take another example. When you dislike your work, it feels like slave labor, and you are resentful. ‘Why must I have such a hard job?’ you fume. On the other hand, when you love what you’re doing, it doesn’t feel like work at all. In fact, you may be working very hard, but it doesn’t feel that way. Hours may pass, but you don’t notice the passage of time. When love is present, the idea of duty vanishes, the idea of work vanishes. When we love, we fulfill our duties in the most natural way, without ever feeling their burden. Duty without love makes us slaves, but love frees us. It is the secret to effortless action. It is the foundation, not only of prayer, but of all our acts.”

“How do we convert our self-­centered intentions into selfless intentions?” I asked.

“Become selfless,” he replied with a chuckle. “You see, when the heart is closed, you love only yourself, and your actions are self-­serving. When your heart starts to open, you start thinking of your nearest and dearest ones. As your heart continues to open, the circumference of your love expands proportionately. When your heart is infinitely open—­when it has no doors, no walls—­its love flows throughout the infinite universe. Then, you start to feel that the universe belongs to you—­but also that you belong to it. Instead of always thinking of I , you now start to think of we .

“So let us renounce selfish prayer for once and for all. In fact, rather than praying for oneself and then including others as an afterthought, why not reverse the equation? Let your real intention be for others and include yourself as a mere afterthought.

“However, you will soon find that you do not enjoy including yourself, even as an afterthought. The remembrance of self always deflates the prayer, you see. The whole thing just collapses. When you have faith, why do you need to remind God of your troubles? And if you don’t have faith, then why pray at all? Acceptance is the noblest path. You know, both of my gurus were often ill. I think that, with their immense capacity, they could easily have cured themselves in an instant. However, their spiritual dimension did not allow for such things. Instead, they preferred to accept the situation as it was, with cheer and with gratitude.”

Then, with a sparkle in his eye, he added, “This does not mean that you should accept your own imperfections!”

“A minute ago, you were speaking about open hearts, but can you tell me what that really means?” I asked.

“Think of a closed heart,” he said. “Then you will under-

stand.”

“All right,” I said. “I take your point, but I would still like you to explain it a little bit, if you don’t mind.”

“I’ll tell you a story,” said Daaji. “Every morning, as the sun got ready to rise, his personal assistant would come, and along with his coffee, he would present the sun with a list of names of those people whom the sun should not forget to shine upon.

“‘Sir, this man in Argentina very much needs your warmth. Make sure you remember to shine on him,’ and ‘Sir, there is a little girl in China who is so delightful. Make sure you remember her, too.’

“One day, after a long day of shining, the sun was about to set, when his assistant ran up to him.

“‘Sir, you cannot set now! You have not completed your work for the day.’

“‘What do you mean?’ asked the sun. ‘I shone all day long, just as I do every day. Now I am tired and want to rest.’

“‘Do you remember that man in Argentina I mentioned this morning?’ asked the sun’s assistant.

“‘Yes, of course I remember,’ said the sun.

“‘But he remained in the dark all day long. You did not shine on him as you’d promised,’ said the assistant.

“The sun ruminated for a moment and said, ‘My dear, it is my nature to shine for one and all, and I have done so. Tell me, what can I do if this man shuts himself indoors all day long with the curtains drawn?’

“An open heart is like the sun, which shines for one and all. It can do nothing but radiate its love. From the open heart, love flows indiscriminately. However, we cannot really say that the heart loves. Rather, an open heart is love itself, and anyone who steps out into its rays feels that they are being loved. And what is a closed heart? It is like the man who shut himself indoors all day long.

“An open heart is a giving heart, but it is a receiving heart as well. In this sense, a heart that is open is a heart that is humble.”

“I don’t follow,” I said.

“Any egotist can give, but it takes a humble person to receive,” Daaji said.

Pulling a coin from his pocket, he handed it to me. As he did so, he asked, “Do you see the position of your hand?” It was open, palm facing upward.

“We associate this pose with asking,” he said. “Prayer is to ask for higher help. Whether you ask for yourself or for others, asking always requires humility, which is what allows us to pray in the first place.

“Conversely, if I were to think of myself as the Giver, as the Infinite Source, then nobody in the world could help me. Even God could not help me. I must have the humility to realize that no matter what I may give to others, none of it has originated with me. If I give someone a dollar, I must also have received it from somewhere, no?”

“Can I keep the coin?” I asked. Daaji chuckled.

“You’re a joker!” he said.

Giving the coin back, I said, “Okay, this is for the wisdom.”

“Oh, it’s worth so little?” he bantered. “Well anyway, I don’t charge anything, so you keep it!”

“In that case, I’ll ask you another question,” I said. “How do we know the best thing to pray for in any given situation?”

“This is a question that only the intellect can ask,” he replied, “and unfortunately, there is no answer with which to satisfy it. Prayer emerges automatically from a heart that loves, so only a loving heart can answer this question. The rational mind can never know the answer.

“You must have heard that famous Chinese folktale about the farmer and his neighbor,” Daaji said.

I had not and asked him to relate the story.

“Long ago, there was a very wise farmer,” he began. “One day, his horse ran away. When his neighbor offered his condolences, the farmer simply said, ‘Who knows what is good and what is bad?’ The next day, the horse returned along with an entire herd of wild horses. This time, the neighbor congratulated the farmer, but again, the farmer replied, ‘Who knows what is good and what is bad?’ The farmer’s son tried to tame one of the wild horses. It threw him, and the farmer’s son broke his leg. The neighbor again offered his condolences. Again, the farmer replied, ‘Who knows what is good and what is bad?’

“Soon afterward, war broke out with a neighboring territory. Some military officers came to draft the farmer’s son into the fight, but upon their arrival they found him incapacitated with his broken leg. In the ensuing war, many young men from the farmer’s village were killed, but the farmer’s son survived due to his broken leg.

“Imagine if the farmer had prayed for his son to be protected from being injured by the wild horses. If that prayer had been answered, he could have become a casualty of war.

“We never know what will turn out for the best or for the worst. We could only know it if we already knew the outcome, but in that case, why would we need to pray?

“During periods of armed conflict, everybody prays. But if every faction is praying for victory, to whom will God respond? The war itself hurts Him. After all, His children are fighting! It is foolishness that makes us pray for such things.” Daaji shook his head sadly, and said, “It only shows how little we know of God.

“Even our altruistic prayers can easily go wrong,” he continued. “Suppose, for example, that you decide to pray for a person’s fear to be removed. It’s a noble thing, right? Well, it certainly looks great on the surface, but it may be that some amount of fear was necessary in that particular case. What would happen if God were to bestow fearlessness upon a bandit or limitless courage upon a corrupt official in a high position? They would only become more brazen, no? In such cases, fearlessness would be counterproductive. My father used to say that if you were to bestow wealth upon a person who has no character, who lacks a moral compass, the wealth would only destroy him. There are many examples of this in our society, where those born into extreme privilege find themselves on life’s difficult roads. We can never know the direction in which such things will take our near and dear ones.”

“So how do we know what to pray for?” I asked.

“When your heart is sensitized, it becomes responsive to the true needs of others. Then, your prayers will always be in natural accordance with that need.”

“All right, then how do you sensitize your heart?” I pressed.

“Do you really want to?” he said. “When you already have so many pains and troubles of your own, do you really want to share in the pains and troubles of others? The first prerequisite of sensitivity is the willingness to do just that. The knowledge of another person’s suffering cannot rise to your awareness until you are able to tolerate that suffering. Secondly, what is the point of your being aware of the plight of others? Suppose that someone hacks into your bank account. Now, they are aware of your financial situation, but do you really think that they have your best interests at heart?”

“Of course not,” I said.

“There’s no good reason for me to know about your finances unless my intent is to help you, right? Similarly, there is no need to become sensitive to others unless you are going to use that sensitivity for their betterment. Only love can make this possible, and when there is love, tolerance will also be present. With these two qualities, your heart will intuit your prayers in the most natural way. It is when we lack these qualities that we become confused about what we should pray for.

“However, if you have the ability to physically help someone, don’t be content to just sit back and pray. Instead, do something! Lend a helping hand. Chariji used to say that prayer is the first means of the weak and the last means of the strong. If you can do nothing, then by all means, pray. But if you can feed someone, do it. If you can house someone, do it. It is your human obligation to try to solve circumstances before you pray for them. Of course, if you do not have enough to feed your own family, then it cannot be correct to feed someone else’s family. You must always fulfill your own duties first.”

“This reminds me of the proverb ‘Charity begins at home,’” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “It is sad that we cannot always do very much to alleviate suffering. Although we may want to help everybody in this world, we simply do not have the personal resources to do so. The least you can do for a suffering person is to spend time with him. Commiserate with him. Sit next to him. You may say nothing; you may do nothing. You are simply there. Your very presence is impactful, you see. Because of it, your friend perceives that ‘Now, my help is here,’ and this gives him strength.”





Connecting Through Prayer


“What is the best way to pray?” I asked.

“Between the singer who hits every note and the singer who means every note, we prefer the latter, don’t we?”

“Yes,” I agreed.

“And when an artist has moved you, you easily forgive their wrong note or their unpolished brushstroke,” he said. “Only sincerity can touch the human heart. If a person were to say, ‘I love you’ in angry tones, would we feel moved?

“In prayer too, it is feeling and sincerity that count. There’s a nice story that comes to mind. An ordinary cowherd was looking after his cows and buffalos. Every night, he prayed to the Lord, and said, ‘If you come join me, I’ll protect you from the heat by letting you sit in the shade of my favorite tree. I’ll give you a bath. And whenever you like, I’ll scratch your back.’ This prayer was heard over and over again by a Brahmin, a priest, who lived next door to the farmer. One day, the Brahmin said, ‘What sort of prayer is this? You’re going to give a bath to God? You’re going to scratch his back? This is nonsense.’ So the farmer humbly said, ‘You teach me.’ The Brahmin agreed and taught him some Sanskrit shlokas , or verses.

“The next day, the farmer forgot the words. ‘Please teach me again,’ he said. ‘I forgot what you taught me.’ The Brahmin taught him again, but the farmer forgot them again. This process repeated itself a few times. In the end, the farmer was confused and disheartened.

“Then, God came to the Brahmin in a dream one night and said, ‘Look, you have really spoiled this fellow’s life. His prayer was the best prayer.’ He had expressed himself, you see. He said, ‘This is what I’m going to do with you. It’s all that I know.’ A Sanskrit thing, you forget. You don’t even understand the meaning of it. It’s not that we’re decrying the value of the ancient shlokas. They’re wonderful. But you have to understand them. A prayer has to have meaning to you. Otherwise, you are like a parrot.

“Words are not feeling—­they are only depictions of feeling. A prayer offered by rote is only a husk of a feeling. As such, it remains hollow. An efficacious prayer is one in which the words reverberate with the heart’s feeling. Yet, when the heart reverberates with feeling, is there any need for words?

“It is only through silence that we commune with the inner Being. In such silence, even our thoughts are mute.”

“I can understand silent prayer,” I said, “but a prayer without thoughts?”

“The act of prayer must evolve into a prayerful inner state,” said Daaji. “For instance, have you observed the interactions of a couple who have been married for decades? A single glance speaks volumes, and hardly any words need to be spoken. Over the years, they have transcended the need for communication and entered into a state of communion with one another. The less two people understand of one another, the more they need to communicate. When a couple is newly married, a lot of communication is required. The more they understand of one another, the subtler their communication becomes, and when they know each other deeply, communication becomes redundant.

“Similarly, in our attempt to reconnect with our Origin, we begin with formal prayer. Prayer is only the first step. It must mature into prayerfulness. For example, it is common to pray before eating, but if after that prayer is completed, you attack your food like a wolf, what happens to the prayerful mood that you have just created? Without a prayerful inner state, prayer is only an artifice. It is absurd.

“Often, we teach children to write by giving them stencils of the letters of the alphabet. By tracing the letters, they learn how to write on their own. Similarly, formal prayer must evolve into prayerfulness. Thereafter, formal prayer becomes unnecessary and redundant. If we do not graduate into prayerfulness, we are like adults who still rely upon stencils to write the alphabet.

“This inner state is unique. It has no external face or any external principles to be followed, meaning rituals. The moment you make prayer a ritual, it loses its importance.

“However, prayerfulness is just another beginning. Its purpose is to take us beyond, to take us to yet another level.”

“What lies beyond prayerfulness?” I asked him.

“Oneness,” said Daaji. “Duality is intrinsic to prayer. In prayer, there are always two: a person in need and the personality whose help is needed. I offer prayer, and the Great Being is supposed to listen to me and answer my prayers. Without this duality, who would offer prayer, and who would receive it? The distinction between the divine presence and me still remains. There are still two. There is still a relationship. Through meditation, on the other hand, we progressively enter into a state of oneness with the divine presence within. We transcend relationship.

“With prayer alone, the possibility of union is rather ­farfetched. We remain what we are, and the Source remains what it is.”

“Then what role does prayer have to play?” I asked.

“It helps us become heartfully cognizant of that divine principle with which we intend to merge,” said Daaji. “Prayer should be offered in such a way that it transforms into meditation. Truly, it is an eruption of the heart, highlighting the pang of separation from the Beloved. ‘I can bear this no longer,’ it says. I am reminded of one couplet from my childhood: ‘O Lord, please visit my little hut at least once. I will treat you so nicely, so lovingly, that you will forget your heavenly abode.’ Prayer is, in a way, an inner cry where pearls of tears slowly flow down the face and beautify the heart’s inner complexities. This pang of the heart serves to keep us glued to the cherished object, and eventually, like a river flowing into the sea, prayerfulness resolves in meditative togetherness with the Source.”





The Heartfulness Prayer


We offer the Heartfulness prayer once before our daily meditation and again just before we go to sleep at the end of our day. If offered in the right spirit, this silent prayer creates a unique inner state. In my early days of practicing Heartfulness, I treated the prayer almost as a formality. Because of this, my heart never looked forward to it. Eventually, I stopped it altogether. One evening, however, I felt particularly drawn to its words, and I offered the prayer with all my heart. Immediately, my inner spiritual condition changed. That night, my sleep was more like deep meditation than regular sleep. When I woke up in the morning, my inner state was unique. Furthermore, my meditation had a special quality about it, which had previously been absent. As a result of this experience, I stopped ignoring the prayer. Instead, it became a fundamental part of my life. Even now, I continue to discover it on a daily basis.

O Master, Thou art the real goal of human life.

We are yet but slaves of wishes, putting bar to our advancement.

Thou art the only God and power to bring us up to that stage.

“What is the purpose of offering prayer before we sleep?” I asked.

“It is the best way to create a prayerful waking state,” said Daaji. “The purpose of prayer is to reestablish our connection with the Divine. But prayerfulness is something different. Prayer­fulness dawns when we already feel the divine presence. Then we feel like bowing our heads, and we wish to melt away in that divine ocean.

“We experience that magnetic presence when we turn toward the Divine with body, mind, and soul. This total orientation to the Divine cannot be manufactured with the conscious mind. In the daytime, when we are fully awake, the intellect tends to ­dominate our consciousness. The intellect has its purpose, but it is not useful for creating a prayerful inner state.

“During the period between wakefulness and sleep, however, there is a convergence between the conscious and subconscious states. The curtain is temporarily lifted, and now the two can meet. At this moment, our brainwaves fall into a pattern known by modern scientists as the alpha state. While in the alpha state, we enter into a kind of inner reverie, in which we become highly susceptible to suggestions. Now, we can deliberately seed the subconscious with prayerful thoughts. These thoughts put down roots and grow in the fertile ground of the subconscious. Just as seeds germinate underground, where they are hidden from sight, our prayers germinate and grow in the obscurity of our subconscious, before bursting forth into our wakeful awareness. In this way, we can seed prayers into the subconscious and harvest a prayerful waking state.

“But we must offer the prayer with feeling. The subconscious only knows the language of feeling, you see. You may sow the subconscious with empty words, but those are like dead seeds that can never germinate. At bedtime, we are often too sleepy to rouse ourselves with true feeling. So, we can practice offering the prayer during the day, while still alert. Create that feeling while you are alert. Then, when you offer it again at bedtime, the very act of praying will revive your earlier state.

“During the daytime, when the intellect is in full swing, we can also understand the meaning of the prayer from another perspective. In fact, I wish for every newcomer to this practice—­and even seasoned practitioners—­to take a day or two and try to understand the true significance and meaning of the prayer. There is more to this prayer than its wording suggests. Then, see what is hidden behind the meaning you discover. Meditate over it again and again. Take the first line, the second line, the third line, and ruminate over every word. Do not rush! New dimensions will open up every time.

“Prayer’s purpose is to transform you. People usually think that transformation comes from above, as a result of having prayed. But it is the offering of the prayer that transforms us, rather than its response. This transformation happens in the very moment that we pray. True prayer is its own answer, you see.

“To forge an intimate connection with your Maker, your heart must be innocent and pure. ‘Be ye like little children,’ said Lord Christ. Guilt is utterly destructive. It is like lead in the heart. The guilty heart hides itself from the Divine, isolating itself in its self-­made prison. In that case, how will we bathe in the restorative rays of the Source? There is no question of whether we will be received and accepted by God. Can a mother withhold her love and forgiveness? Rather, it is we who cannot accept or forgive ourselves. Repentance is not a ritual. Self-­forgiveness only comes when our hearts repent for our mistakes. To cry your heart out is worth a thousand prayers for forgiveness. Tears are the sign of sincerity—­even when our hearts are light and happy.”

“What if we don’t feel guilty about anything?” I asked.

“Then congratulations,” he laughed. “You must be a saint. But, even a saint finds room for improvement. Especially the saint, in fact, because she is so humble that she always finds herself to be at fault, even when she really is not. As we become more receptive to the voice of the conscience, we find that it holds us accountable for smaller and smaller matters. Even at the subtlest hint of a wrong thought, we find that the conscience pricks. So at night, scan your heart and see where your conscience is pricking you. See where you feel uncomfortable and find out the reason. Without such introspection, there is no possibility of improvement.

“On the other hand, the notion of self-­improvement is paradoxical. When there is ‘self,’ there is no improvement. If you introspect with ego, thinking that I will correct myself , it cannot work. Too much of your ‘I’ is present. In prayer, on the other hand, your heart simply droops in surrender, and you leave everything to the higher Being, saying, ‘Please, let thy will be done.’ What is needed is a mixture of introspection and surrender—­a friendly pact between you and God. Through prayerful introspection, you discover your defects, but rather than resolving to correct them yourself, you relinquish yourself and invoke higher help.

“Of course, it would be better to avoid making mistakes day after day, hour after hour! It is said that a fool recognizes a mistake in retrospect, and an intelligent person recognizes it during the act, but a wise person knows beforehand and avoids it.”

“How can we know beforehand?” I asked.

“With prayerful alertness,” he replied.

“To what?” I asked.

“To the signals that emanate from your own heart and guide you from within,” he said. “If you maintain this attitude throughout your daily affairs, wisdom will positively flourish.

“When you are ready to offer prayer, do so with a humble heart—­a heart full of love.

“Sit up, gently close your eyes, and relax. Repeat the prayer mentally twice or thrice, lingering over every word and phrase so that you are able to sense its meaning as deeply as you can. Meditate over this meaning and allow yourself to get lost, or absorbed, in this prayerful meditation. When you feel ready, go straight to sleep.

“After you finish the prayer, make sure that you take care to preserve the condition that you have just created. Don’t just plop your head on the pillow. Move slowly. Sink gradually into the reclining pose. Don’t start thinking about your day or your plans for tomorrow. The condition that you have just created must be allowed to continue percolating within you as you drift off.”

“So this prayer becomes a meditation,” I said.

“It is a prayer-­meditation that creates a meditatively prayerful state,” he replied. “Babuji received this prayer in the form of vibrations, which he experienced as feelings and then translated into words. Our job is to reverse the process. We translate these words back into the feelings that constitute their essence, by which they arrive at the Source from where they originated. By meditating upon its words, we discover its deeper essence. This uplifts our consciousness. When we go to sleep in this consciousness, our sleep gets transformed into a very special state known as yoganidra, or yogic sleep.”

“What is yoganidra?” I asked.

“There are people who sleep so deeply that even if you throw water on them, they will not wake up,” said Daaji. “For others, your mere presence in the room wakes them up. Generally, we can identify a spectrum between sound sleep and light sleep. In yoganidra, our consciousness expands in an omnidirectional manner. While moving toward deep sleep, it simultaneously expands toward wakeful awareness. As a result, we are in both states simultaneously. While sleeping deeply, we are also profoundly awake. So in yoganidra, we are able to expand consciousness, rather than deriving only physical and mental rest.

“But much more happens in this state, in fact. A yogi can work in other locations, in other dimensions, in other times. Astral travel also takes place, where the physical form does not limit your work. Yoganidra is the best situation for all this to occur, but this is a matter for personal experience, rather than for discussion. Let us now focus on what is fathomable, according to the level of evolution that we all share. Essentially, let us realize that the yoganidra state prepares you to soar higher into the sky of superconsciousness during morning meditation.”

“How does it do that?” I asked.

“The quality of any meditation is largely determined by our attitude, or mood. Moods develop gradually and wane gradually. You cannot snap your fingers and command a meditative mood to arise at that moment of need. It must already be in you. But if you meditate first thing in the morning, when will that mood have had a chance to develop? It must develop during sleep.”

“And for this, we must plant the right seed at bedtime,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “The bedtime prayer triggers a prayerful consciousness, filled with anticipation to unite with the Source. This anticipation swells throughout the night, and by morning, we approach our meditation with an inner joy that draws us deeper into the Source.”

“At night we pray, and then we go to sleep,” I said. “In the morning we also pray, but then we meditate instead. What determines whether we go to sleep or go into meditation?”

“Our subliminal intention,” said Daaji. “When we offer this prayer in the morning, just before we meditate, we don’t repeat it two to three times as we do at night. We offer it only once and start to meditate.”

“Why?” I asked.

“If you offer the prayer in the right spirit at bedtime, that prayerful state will still be with you in the morning. Even if it’s not, all you will require is a brief reminder. Like a horse that runs at the mere shadow of the whip, our inner state gets enlivened with a single offering of prayer. To soar into the skies of superconsciousness now becomes child’s play.”





Prayer



Sit comfortably and gently close your eyes.



In the morning:



Slowly and silently, offer the prayer once before you begin meditation.



At bedtime:



Silently repeat the prayer a few times, pausing in between. Meditate for ten to fifteen minutes over the true meaning of the words. Feel them resonate in your heart, rather than trying to understand them intellectually. Let the meaning surface from within. Try to get lost in the feeling beyond the words.



O Master! Thou art the real goal of human life.



We are yet but slaves of wishes, putting bar to our advancement.



Thou art the only God and power to bring us up to that stage.





Part 3





The Guru





6.





Role of the Guru




T hroughout my conversations with Daaji, he often made mention of his two gurus, Babuji and Chariji. However, most of these references were in passing, and I felt that without a deeper examination of the role of the guru, our discussions would be incomplete.

“Your gurus obviously had an enormous impact on your life,” I said. “Would you say that it is necessary to have a guru in order to evolve spiritually?”

“First, let us understand what a guru is,” said Daaji. “Then, you decide whether or not he is necessary!”

“Okay,” I said, “then what is a guru?”

“That’s also up to you!” he replied. “At what level do you accept him? To some, having a guru is a mere formality. To others, the guru is a teacher. To some people, he is the teaching itself—­its embodied, living example. And then, there are those people for whom the guru is its very essence. Really, the guru is all of these.

“Teaching is the guru’s lowest level. It is his lowest function. Teaching is limited because if a person does not truly crave divine knowledge, no teacher can make them learn. If they do crave it, then they will find hints everywhere, and teaching will become redundant.

“Also, the knowledge we receive through teaching is always secondhand knowledge. Secondhand knowledge doesn’t enlighten us very much. It is better to observe and experience something for yourself. Also, you always check a guru’s words against your own heart. If your heart agrees with them, you say, ‘Yes, the guru is correct.’ If your heart says no, then you ignore the guru. So who is the real guru—­the one who gives you lessons or your own heart?”

“So the guru’s purpose is not really to teach,” I said.

“If the guru has any teaching at all, it is their example,” said Daaji. “Yet, what do we see when we observe the guru? I’m reminded of something that Babuji once said: ‘Many come to see me, but nobody really sees me.’ Often, people try to copy the guru’s example, but they miss his essence. They miss the very thing that makes the guru worth copying. Instead, they only mime the guru’s actions, dress, or mannerisms. Thus, the real thing eludes them. They miss out on the guru’s essential nature.

“This is not their fault. In order to assess anything and be conclusive about it, we must be subtler than the object under assessment. That is why the guru consistently eludes the student. His degree of subtlety prevents us from truly observing him. At most, we see a refined person who occasionally says something wise. The very subtlest thing is the Ultimate itself. So how can it ever be observed, and how can we ever conclude anything about it?

“But through spiritual practice, we become subtler, too. Now, we start to grasp more of what the guru actually is. And to the extent that we can grasp the guru, we can pick up on things. As I said already, he will rarely teach us anything. We have to pick it up on our own.

“Really, the guru does nothing at all. Nor does he have to. Can night exist in the presence of the sun? The sun rises, and darkness simply retreats. The sun does nothing to make the darkness retreat. Its nature is to be as it is. Similarly, the guru. The literal meaning of the word guru is ‘dispeller of darkness.’ But, like the sun, the guru does nothing to dispel the darkness. He simply is as he is.

“The moment that the bud comes into contact with the sun’s rays, it slowly starts to open up. Did the sun actually do anything to make this happen? Did the bud? It just happens.

“So the guru does nothing—­it is his presence that does everything. And his presence only works when the aspirant’s heart is ready to flower. Trying to force open a bud would only destroy it. If the guru were to act upon us, it would be an imposition. It would be destructive. So the guru will not do it.”

“But the guru does clean us and transmit to us,” I said.

“No,” said Daaji. “It is because of the guru’s presence that we become clean. It is because of his presence that we receive transmission. The guru does nothing at all. But to become what he is, he had to work hard on himself, just as we have to work hard on ourselves. We have to practice! Through practice, we prepare our hearts so that they draw everything out of the guru. That is why we meditate, clean, and offer prayer, day after day. Without our work, the guru’s presence in our lives goes to waste.”

“So our personal work is the catalyst,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “Practice is essential. You can meet the guru every day, you can eat your meals with him and rub shoulders with him, but if your heart isn’t prepared, it won’t help you one little bit.

“But if your heart is prepared, then why would you need to meet the guru so often? The guru works from afar. Of course, he does not really work, but work happens through him. And you need not be in the guru’s physical presence for that work to take place. That is a limitation we set in our own minds. The guru need not know your name. He need not be familiar with your face. Such conscious knowledge is totally unnecessary for his work. The guru need not even be aware that he is working on you because spiritual work proceeds automatically from his heart. Your heart has called out, and the guru is nature’s response. Thus, the guru-­aspirant relationship is an inner one, fanned in the secrecy of the heart.”

“To what extent do we need to personally interact with a guru?” I asked.

“The relationship need not manifest on the human level at all,” said Daaji. “Nevertheless, it is best to meet your guru once in your life. This doesn’t mean that you have to shake hands and have a conversation. But be around him once. If your attitude is right at that time, if you are receptive, something special happens. Your entire spiritual journey is plotted out. Any additional meeting is just a bonus. We needn’t follow the guru around, as we see happening so often in India. We should never worship the guru, as so many people do. These people believe that the physical frame of the guru contains the Ultimate Source. His frame does not contain the Source. The Source is nowhere. It can also be anywhere, but the only place that you will ever find it is within yourself . The purpose of the external guru is to lead you to the inner one—­the divine Self, which guides and inspires us.

“And it must be a living guru—­a guru from ages past cannot help you. Can you illuminate a room with a flame that has been extinguished? All that remains is their teachings. It’s book knowledge.”

“So we need a living example,” I said.

“Even an example isn’t necessary,” said Daaji. “If you don’t meet him very often, of what use can his example be? What we really need is the essence that he infuses in our hearts in the form of transmission.

“Of course, the essence is everywhere because the Source is everywhere! But without a living guru to distill it and focus it on our hearts, we remain blind to it. We remain unaffected by it, and we struggle without end because there is no help.

“Without someone to help us, we have trouble going beyond ourselves, beyond our own limitations. Imagine trying to move a broken-­down car by pushing it from the inside. No matter how hard you push, that car will never move. It needs an external push to help it along. The guru is that push. We have been pushing ourselves from the inside for so long. Eventually, we realize that this is a field in which we need guidance in order to progress.”

“How do we find a guru?” I asked.

“The guru is the response to the sincere seeker,” he replied. “Babuji often said that the true cry of the aspirant brings the master to their door. In some cases, the aspirant is conscious of this inner cry. In other cases, this cry is unconscious. And while it is true that the aspirant draws the guru, what is equally true is that the guru selects the aspirant.”

“How so?” I asked.

“In my childhood, I had a number of experiences,” said Daaji. “Whenever I fell sick, I would have one dream. In this dream, I would see a rider atop a white steed. He was dressed in a white flowing gown, and he had a beautiful white beard. Normally, you forget dreams, but when you have the same dream over and over again, you tend to remember it.”

“How old were you?” I asked.

“It started when I was around four or five, and it came periodically until I was eleven. That last time, I was studying outside, sitting in a cloth beach chair. This was in our village. There, I had this vision once again, and entered into samadhi. I was gone for hours.

“Soon after that last experience, I started feeling an inner pull, a kind of aspiration. I told my family members that I had started to feel something special in my heart. Years later, I would learn that at the time of this experience, Babuji was passing through my area. When I finally met him, years later, I immediately recognized his face. He was the figure in white who had been appearing to me since childhood.”

“So he was already preparing you,” I said.

“The guru prepares all of us far in advance,” said Daaji. “But at some level, I was conscious of it. Generally, such preparation is unconscious. It takes place in secrecy, unknown to us and anyone else. It’s like a seed that germinates underground. Only the sower knows that it is there.

“Wherever Babuji would go, he would transmit. Those who were ready would eventually answer the call. Somehow, we all made our way to him on our own. In the 1940s, he toured India by train. In certain places, he would stop and hire a rickshaw to take him around the city. Sitting in the back, he would transmit everywhere he went. When he was satisfied that the area had been seeded with spiritual potential to the desired extent, he would take the train elsewhere and repeat the process. Babuji continued this seeding throughout his life, though later on he would do it without leaving his house.”

“So is it that the guru prepares us or that our hearts call the guru?” I asked.

“His very existence is a response to the collective inner need,” said Daaji. “Due to his presence, some people awaken to that need. Their hearts cry out. Spiritual aspiration is present in all, but it in many cases it is dormant. Sometimes, it only takes a touch of transmission, and you become awakened to your deeper purpose. So, the guru transmits and transmits. That transmission is like an invitation. If we are responsive, we find our way to the guru. He cannot force us to come. Your heart must permit it. The guru can never go against your heart. No matter how great a guru he may be, the unwilling heart deflects his work.

“That is why it is not possible to enforce inner change. There must be willingness on the part of the aspirant. Only then can the guru’s work bear fruit. In the relationship between the aspirant and a capable guru, the aspirant is the deciding factor—­never the guru. A guru may be great, he may be powerful, but he can never impose that power upon us.

“There are a number of unfortunate examples where charlatans pose as gurus and exert power over others for the sake of personal profit or to satisfy their own egos. That is one reason why blind faith is dangerous. We should only put our full faith in someone when they have already proved themselves to be trustworthy and capable. Faith only comes when we see a pattern of results—­never before. It should never be blind.”

“But how do you recognize a guru in the first place?” I asked.

“There are no outward signs,” said Daaji. “A true guru will not show off. You can know a zebra by its stripes and a leopard by its spots. But a guru? Anyone can put on robes and grow a beard. Such external features are meaningless and therefore unnecessary as well. A guru may be tall, or he may be short. His appearance may be regal or nondescript. He may be well educated or even illiterate. He may be articulate. He may fumble upon his words. He may be wealthy, or he may be a pauper. We learn nothing from the guru’s outer attributes. The only deciding factor is the guru’s inner spiritual dimension.

“But how to determine this? If you were able to comprehend the guru’s inner state, you might not even need a guru!”

“Then what is the way to test him?” I asked.

“When your soul in its wisdom finds the person who is right, you will feel peace and calmness in your heart,” said Daaji. “It may come immediately after starting your spiritual practice, or it may come after some time, but it will come. When this is the case, know for sure that this is the one who can guide you.”

“For how long do we need to practice before we find this peace and calmness?” I asked.

“Well, it depends on you,” he said. “In my very first sitting, I knew that I had found what I was looking for. For others, it can take a few weeks or a few months. You see, some people need time to be convinced by their own experience.”

“And how can you tell if it’s the wrong person?” I asked.

“Your heart will start doubting,” said Daaji. “Of course, the mind will always have a few doubts. Its nature is to question things. But when your heart is restless and heavy with doubt, know that this person is not for you.

“Conversely, when your heart is satisfied, then don’t go on entertaining mental doubts forever. Now, it’s time to settle down in your practice and work on yourself.

“But you always have the right to leave your guru if you are unsatisfied. There should be no trepidation about parting ways with any guru. The guru has no right to expect discipleship. He has no right to be followed.

“Aspirants always retain the right to sever their connection with a guru. For the guru’s part, he should always assist the aspirant to find someone better than himself if he is unable to take the aspirant any further on the spiritual journey.

“In 1961, one seeker came to Babuji. This seeker already had a guru—­a Swamiji, as he called him. However, in Babuji’s presence, he had a better experience. So he wrote a letter to Babuji saying that he had a problem. He wanted to take Babuji as his guru, but at the same time, he didn’t want to betray his Swamiji. I have Babuji’s reply to that letter.”

Daaji disappeared into his bedroom and returned a minute later.

“I’ll read you one paragraph from Babuji’s reply,” he said. “Babuji writes: ‘As far as I am concerned, please consider me as your servant, keeping the house clean by sweeping out the garbage. Consider me as the servant, and Swamiji as the Master. I have no hesitation in serving you and also wish you to keep paying the wages of this service to Swamiji.’

“Also,” Daaji continued, “in my personal experiences with Babuji, I never found him to comport himself as if he was a guru, or a master. Rather, he seemed to regard himself as someone who was completely insignificant.

“I’m reminded of one instance when a big government official came to visit him. The official got off the train at Shahjahan­pur [the city in which Babuji lived] and found a man there to receive him. Without a word, the official handed over his luggage and the two of them proceeded by rickshaw to Babuji’s house. Now, this official was rather large, and he had a lot of luggage too, so there was not enough room on the seat for the two of them. So, the official sat on the seat, and the other man sat on the rickshaw’s floor. When they arrived at Babuji’s house, the man took the official’s luggage and brought it to his room. Later, the official went to pay his respects to Babuji. There, he received the shock of his life. He saw this same little man sitting in Babuji’s chair. Now it dawned on him that Babuji had personally received him at the station! He had taken Babuji for a servant.

“You know, there is one Sanskrit word: mahatma. Maha means ‘great,’ and atma means ‘soul,’ so mahatma means ‘great soul.’ Often, the term is applied honorifically. In some cases, it is even self-­applied! Well, Babuji disliked this word very much. He said that a true mahatma has no greatness, but rather, is one who is totally insignificant—­to himself, to the world, and to everything. He is absolutely humble. If you ever think that you have become great, you’re digging your own grave. A true mahatma is one who claims nothing, who promises nothing, who has become nothing. But such figures are often neglected in favor of disingenuous or deluded gurus who wield charm, charisma, and petty miracles to secure disciples for themselves.

“A guru should never even entertain the idea that he is a guru. If this feeling enters into his heart even once, I think he becomes immediately disqualified for the job. Really, a guru should consider himself to be something even less than a servant. But instead, we tend to find so many self-­proclaimed gurus. You know, I never heard Chariji refer to himself as anything other than a disciple of Babuji. And Babuji … he was so humble that the word ‘I’ seemed to confuse him.

“You see, not many really know what a guru is. It seems that people are content to call someone a guru if he simply puts on ocher robes, or if he displays knowledge of ancient texts or speaks wise words. Many gurus don’t even give you a practice. They may give you a few exercises, but their work stops there. There is no continuous inner contact. Really, it is like being abandoned by the side of the road! Can such gurus trigger the spiritual journey and keep us moving until we reach the far-­off shore? Can they clear away the inner intricacies and complexities that ensnare us and bar further progress? Can they weaken the restless ten­dencies of the mind and infuse noble qualities in our hearts? Can they remove our samskaric load? There are also many other things that the guru must do in order to ensure our safe arrival at the destination. Ultimately, the guru bears responsibility for the spiritual progress of each aspirant under his care. He must answer for each one of them, both to his own guru and to nature itself. I think that nature will impose a heavy penalty on any guru who is unable or unwilling to fulfill these duties. It is better to have no guru at all than to have a useless or malevolent guru.

“And there are also gurus who get jealous if a student excels them. Should a parent ever be jealous of their children? It is every parent’s dream to see their child exceed them. Similarly, a true guru will not be satisfied with taking you beyond yourself—­he wants to take you beyond himself. He wants you to rise to the very pinnacle of evolutionary heights—­a pinnacle that keeps getting higher.”

“What do you mean by that?” I asked.

“What was considered the greatest spiritual attainment one thousand years ago cannot compare to today’s possibilities. And what is possible today may be nothing compared to tomorrow’s possibilities.”

“So spirituality keeps evolving,” I said.

“Yes,” said Daaji. “In the time of Copernicus, for instance, the idea that the earth revolves around the sun was something new. In those days, it represented the very best of modern scientific understanding. It was cutting edge. Today, every child takes this knowledge for granted. These days, we are fascinated with things like quantum mechanics instead. Does that diminish Copernicus in any way? No! That he knew nothing of Einstein or Hawking does not reduce his stature. In his own time, he was great.

“Similarly, the spiritual elders of the past were great in their own times. But times also change. Today’s spiritual giants make new discoveries. Do you think yesterday’s luminaries are jealous? Wherever they are, they must be dancing! We also hope for a new generation of spiritual geniuses who will one day exceed those of today.

“Another meaning of the word guru is ‘great one’ or ‘big one.’ From something big, things can flow toward us. That means that the guru is a giver. But in today’s world, gurus tend to be receivers instead. They like to be worshipped. They like to receive guru dakshina [traditional fees]. They want to have attention, they want to be loved, they want to be revered, they want to be followed. A real guru wants none of this. A guru should never be at the receiving end. He never says, ‘Follow me.’ Rather, he stays where he is and allows his disciples to go ahead of him. Let me see how high you can climb , he thinks. Of course, his vigilant eyes will always be there. He is always protecting. He won’t think, Let him go higher and see if he falls!

“At the same time, the guru is the biggest obstacle on our spiritual path.”

“Really?” I said.

“Yes, because you keep depending on him for everything,” said Daaji. “‘His grace will take care of everything,’ you say. It’s nonsense. His help is there, no doubt, but you’ve got to prepare yourself. You’ve got to work hard on yourself.

“Don’t think that I’m trying to praise myself, but I moved to the United States with twenty dollars in my pocket. My father was always willing to help me, but I didn’t look forward to that help. I stood on my own two legs and became successful.

“That’s why I often say, ‘Think that your guru is dead.’ This means that you should work as if you had no guru. The guru is not the giver of progress, you see. Rather, he is its catalyst . Our work attracts his energies. When you take a single step on the path, he takes you one step further. The only difference is that his single footstep can cover infinite realms of consciousness.

“When you practice, a capable guru ensures that your spiritual journey begins as soon as possible, and he continuously ensures that you stay in motion so that your journey continues.

“In whatever stage you may be at present, the guru is busy preparing the ground for the next stage. A guru can even give you the condition of a very high stage, far before you have actually reached it.

“This happened to me in 1982. I was visiting Babuji at his home in Shahjahanpur. One afternoon, I went out to run an errand. When I returned, Babuji looked at me and said, ‘You should remain in this condition twenty-­four hours a day.’ I had to look inside to understand what he was talking about.

“At that time, I was almost a beginner, but the condition he gave me was something that comes at an extremely advanced stage. Babuji had not actually put me in that advanced stage. I was not ready for it yet, so instead, he gave me the experience of that stage. He gave me the quality of that stage without actually putting me there. Really, such things are completely unheard of! A great guru can do magical things, you see.

“Also, there is a certain juncture that comes at each and every stage of the spiritual journey. It is a stage in which seekers tend to get wobbly. They think, What am I doing messing around with spirituality? Then, they can disappear. So the guru has to stabilize their emotions at that point and satisfy them with experiences.

“A guru must at least be able to take you to the stage of moksha—­liberation. This is an elementary step, and it is barely the beginning of the journey. Really, the guru should be able to bring you to the stage of realization—­and even further. The stage of realization lies far beyond that of liberation.”

“What is realization?” I asked.

Daaji laughed. “Well, Babuji used to say that if realization can be defined, it is not realization! However you may attempt to define it, it will be something beyond that definition. But to put it in a simplistic way, we can say that realization is to realize the Self within—­the core and center of our being. But is there any difference between our own innermost center and that of God’s manifestation?”

“So realizing the Self is the same as realizing God,” I said.

“Wait and see,” said Daaji. “Whatever it is, it is the minimum qualification that a guru must possess. Otherwise, how can he help us attain it? The guru’s help is required at lower stages as well. There are times in our journey when we arrive at passes that cannot be crossed. It is as if you had been walking nicely through the plains, and now you encounter a deep river. What will you do? So the guru has to take you across. And then, at a very high stage, you become so surrendered to the divine will that you have no more desire to progress. Now, the guru must come again and, like a kangaroo carrying its joey in its pouch, the guru carries you to the next stage. When we finally arrive at the shores of the infinite ocean, we find the guru waiting for us there too, for now he must teach us to swim.

“The guru achieves all of this through transmission, of which he is the custodian. However, a single dose of grace imparted by a guru of caliber can achieve what thousands of transmissions can never do. Again, this happens in a magical way. One has to experience grace to know what it is and to know how it differs from transmission. It is a matter of feeling. Without transmission and grace, the Heartfulness practice has no meaning, and without the guru, there is no transmission, nor is there anyone to channel grace toward the aspirant.

“Just as a currency must be backed by something, so must spiritual practice. Currency used to be backed by gold. Now there is no more gold standard, but currencies have other forms of backing because a currency without backing is valueless. That is the role of the guru—­he backs the practice. He is its guarantor—­the spiritual gold standard.”





Conclusion



F ifteen years have passed since my first experience with Heartfulness. What has driven me to continue this practice for all these years? I was completely satisfied on my very first day. What remained for me to pursue? For as much peace and contentment as these last fifteen years have brought, a certain inner restlessness continues to increase. That restlessness comes in response to a silent inner signal in the form of a question:

“Are you what you ought to be?”

There is no external answer to this question. The answer is in the question itself. If I am what I ought to be, the question should not arise. This question is not an expression of despair or helplessness. Rather, it is pregnant with possibility. Without such questions, there can be no evolution.

Transformation is in our hands. Heartfulness practice provides us with the tools to transform ourselves, but we must choose to use them. To transform yourself is to create yourself anew, starting with the transformation of your inner being. Inner transformation comes automatically, as a result of meditative practice. Without inner transformation, the transformation of our character and lifestyle is only a dream. However, such outer transformation is not automatic. It requires absolute willingness on our part.

The miracle of Heartfulness is that in the very moment we decide to change ourselves, change has already arrived. We don’t need to wish for it. We don’t need to pray for it. We don’t even need to work for it. When we are absolutely willing and open, we need only look within ourselves, and we find that it is already present.

“Are you what you ought to be?”

We can also respond to this question with yet another question: “How do I know what I ought to be?” Again, there is no external answer. Only your heart can say. But if you are willing to listen, the heart will not remain silent on this matter. Rather, it will gush with answers.

However, even if the heart continuously gives you signals, you will miss them if your mind is as turbulent as the deafening sea. The heart is able to guide us whenever we are in need, but its signals emerge amid the background noise of our thoughts, emotions, sensations, and other stimuli. When our inner environment is so noisy, how can we perceive the heart’s subtle directions?

In order to describe such situations, scientists use the signal-­to-­noise ratio. This ratio describes the extent to which a desired signal is audible amid the presence of background noise. For instance, when we tune a radio receiver to a certain frequency, we often hear some static. When there is too much static, the frequency becomes inaudible. The signal has been drowned out by the noise.

The signals within us never shout. They never insist. They come as gently and softly as a whisper. They are not words, but subtle feelings, reflected in the mind as inspired ideas. Unless the mind is silent and still, and unless our emotions are balanced, these signals never surface to our awareness.

Imagine a treasure chest that sits at the bottom of a lake. If only the lake were placid and clear, you would be able to see the golden glimmers under the surface. But the water is rough and filled with sediment, and you cannot see a thing. This lake is the mind, and the treasure chest is the heart. The waves are our unregulated thoughts, and the sediment is the network of impressions that distort our perception. Only when the mind becomes calm and clear can the heart reveal its secrets. In order for it to become calm, we meditate. In order for it to become clear, we do cleaning. And in order to be receptive to the heart’s divine messages, we must maintain an inner attitude of prayerfulness and humility. With a receptive attitude and a mind that is calm and clear, the heart’s impulses are automatically translated into inspired thoughts. These inspired thoughts now guide our responses to life’s varied circumstances.

Throughout history, human beings have regarded inspiration as something that comes of its own accord, something beyond our conscious control. However, we can make ourselves receptive to it. All we need to do is still the mind through meditative practice. In that sense, meditation is a way to actively cultivate inspiration, which we can then capture.

But what do we do with that captured inspiration? We can use it to respond heartfully to our circumstances, or we can choose to react with the mind instead. Daaji once told me that if we choose to ignore the heart’s evolutionary signals, no practice can help us. No guru can help us. Even God cannot help us.

“Why not?” I asked him.

“It is easy to wake up a sleeping person,” he said. “But no one can wake up a person who is only pretending to sleep!”

If you are responsive to the heart, it speaks to you with progressive clarity. If you ignore its signals, they become weaker and more difficult to perceive. But it is easy to follow the heart! All we need is a little courage and conviction, which arise out of repeated experiences.

The heart’s inspirations are always in accord with its nature, which is love itself. The heart will never lead you astray. It will never tell you to rob someone, for instance, or to hurt anyone. Therefore, when living by the heart’s inspirations, our actions become effortlessly and automatically good.

At times, the heart inspires us to take positive action. It tells us to help someone, or perhaps, it may give us a new insight. The heart can also assume the form of your conscience and warn you against a negative action. However, it rarely provides positive feedback. As Daaji often says, the heart does not congratulate you for your good deeds!

“Do your lungs congratulate you for breathing normally?” he once asked me.

We only become aware of our breathing when it is labored. It is a signal that something is wrong. Similarly, the heart will never say, “Wow, you’re doing great stuff!” It simply informs you when you need to change yourself.

Yet, when your orientation in life becomes evolutionary in nature, the heart positively vibrates with mystical joy. That is the heart’s elation. Its purpose is being fulfilled.

But when is our orientation evolutionary? To answer this question, we must understand something about the heart. The heart is biased toward the common good. A preoccupation with one’s own, individual evolution does not move the heart because the heart is not preoccupied with “self.” The mind thinks my , but the heart thinks our . The mind thinks me , but the heart thinks we . To the heart, the universe is a whole.

A spiritual life is one that has come into contact with the universal. In that case, it is not just about “me.” The stream that has become separate from the river rarely makes it to the ocean. Rather, it stagnates in one place and starts to stink. If we want purpose in our lives—­if we want to make it to the shores of the infinite ocean—­then we must forget about individual purpose. When I am only concerned for myself, my heart does not cooperate in anything that I do. I have realized this practically in my own life. Purpose is never individual. It is always collective. When we are deeply altruistic in word, deed, and, most importantly, intention, our lives assume a different order. We become ennobled. Then our hearts roar into action. So listen to the heart carefully and follow it faithfully. Let it be your inner guru. It will guide you at every step of the way and in every last detail of your life. That is Heartfulness.





Afterword



I met Kamlesh D. Patel (known to his associates as, simply, Daaji) a few years ago when one of his followers mentioned to me the work of the Heartfulness Institute. It was through this introduction that I became aware of heartfulness practice and its profound effect on opening the heart.

My own path to opening the heart began when I was twelve years old. Growing up in a challenging and difficult background that had created anger, hostility, and despair, I had begun to believe that my situation could not change and that I didn’t deserve for it to change. Then one day I met someone like Daaji who made me see the world in a different way—to see that what creates happiness, allows individuals to thrive, and promotes well-being is to be heart-centered. This insight kindled a spark in me all those years ago. And it is what I have learned more deeply over the last decade as the founder and director of the Center for Compassion and Altruism Research and Education at Stanford University.

In my own journey, heart-centeredness has been a truth that I have gradually lived into. In earlier life, I believed that success and happiness were a result of professional position, wealth, and the acquisition of “things.” Yet when I had all of this, I found I was more unhappy than I had ever been. Happiness dwelt elsewhere. As Daaji and his coauthor, Joshua Pollock, have so eloquently shown in The Heartfulness Way, it is through the cultivation of the heart that one finds meaning, purpose, and, ultimately, happiness. In a heart-centered life, everything is possible.

Within this profound volume are several practical tools and techniques to allow you to develop a Heartfulness meditation practice. Heartfulness is our natural state. It is our natural state to be calm, kind, and compassionate. It is in this state that we are able to see the true nature of reality, to see our purpose, and to have clarity in regard to our interdependence. When we are in the state of heartfulness, we give love unconditionally, recognizing that when we give to another, we are giving to ourselves. As Daaji says, “In The Heartfulness Way, we explore and expand our consciousness, and even go beyond consciousness to uncover our true potentiality.”

Joshua tells us, “I pored through the literature of the Buddhists, Taoists, Sufis, Christians, and others. I read Aristotle and Augustine, Emerson and Epicurus. Gradually it dawned on me that through all my reading, I had only learned about the experiences and ideas of others. What about my own?” In his journey, we see our common journey. And when we reflect on that common journey, we see so many similarities and so many truths.

Through heartfulness meditation, we are able to move from the complexity of mind to the simplicity of heart. In a seeming paradox, this allows us to free our mind from the many distractions that are not part of our natural state. As a species we evolved to care and to nurture. But unfortunately, this natural state has for many been hijacked by the demands of our modern society. The result is suffering and anxiety. Our mind is causing our suffering. Heartfulness practice allows us to see this reality, improving our focus and concentration while also nurturing our heart. It creates an environment in which we are able to promote positive mental states that then affect our perceptions of the world and our actions within it.

We are surrounded by exemplars of heartfulness, compassion, and kindness from every religion and spiritual tradition. Each through their own path has found this common truth that true freedom and happiness are the manifestations of a heart-centered life.

This truth is the gift of The Heartfulness Way : a book that gives us techniques and methods to see the power of heartfulness to enrich our own lives, and by doing so to enrich the lives of those around us.

—James R. Doty, MD

Professor of Neurosurgery and Founder and Director of the Center for Compassion and Altruism Research and Explanation (CCARE), Stanford University School of Medicine





Experience Heartfulness



To experience Heartfulness:

Visit us at http://www.heartfulness.org

http://www.daaji.org

https://www.heartfulness.uk

Like us at https://www.facebook.com/practiceheartfulness

https://www.facebook.com/kamleshdaaji

Follow us at https://twitter.com/heartful_ness

https://twitter.com/kamleshdaaji

Email us at info@heartfulness.org

Meditate with us on the Let’s Meditate app for Android

and iPhone

Read Heartfulness Magazine at http://www.heartfulness

magazine.com.





Glossary



adi shakti or aadi shakti . The original force, or original power, utilized in the process of yogic transmission.

artha . The ways and means of making a living; material prosperity; wealth and power.

asana or aasana . Posture; the third stage, or limb, of ashtanga yoga.

ashtanga yoga or ashtaanga yoga . Patanjali described yoga as having eight steps, or limbs: yama (good conduct); niyama (regularity, observances); asana (posture); pranayama (breath); pratyahara (inner withdrawal); dharana (mental focus); dhyana (continued attention); and samadhi (original condition, balance).

bhakti . Devotion.

bhoga or bhogam or bhog or bhogaa . The process of undergoing the effects of impressions; experience; enjoyment; suffering.

Brahman or Brahm . God, the Ultimate.

dharana or dharna . Fixing the mind (sixth limb of Patanjali’s yoga).

dharma : A term with many applications, depending on the context: duty, righteousness, destined way, truth, virtue, that which upholds, life of law and justice.

dhyana or dhyaan . Continued attention; meditation; the seventh stage, or limb, of Patanjali’s ashtanga yoga.

guru . One who transmits light, knowledge; a spiritual teacher.

gyan or gyana or jnana or jnaana . Gnosticism; knowledge.

kama or kaama . Desire; love; passion; pleasures and enjoyments.

karma . Action.

mahatma or mahaatmaa . Great soul, saint.

moksha . Liberation.

nishkam karma or nishkaama karma . Work without attachment to the result; desireless action.

niyama or niyam . Second stage, or limb, of ashtanga yoga; observances.

Para Brahman . Indeterminate Absolute; God as the Ultimate Cause of Existence.

pranahuti or praanaahuti . Process of yogic transmission; derived from prana, meaning life, and ahuti, meaning offering. Offering of the life force by the guru into the aspirant’s heart.

pranayama or pranayamaa . Derived from prana (life, vital force) and from ayama (to expand). Hatha yoga breathing technique. Fourth step in Patanjali’s ashtanga yoga.

pratyahara or pratyaahaara . The inner withdrawal of the sense organs and mind. Fifth step of Patanjali’s yoga.

raja yoga or raaja yoga . Ancient system or science to realize the Self or God. Usually used for meditative practices, as distinguished from hatha yoga.

samadhi or samaadhi . Original balance. State in which we stay attached to Reality; a return to the original condition, which reigned in the beginning. The eighth limb of Patanjali’s yoga.

samskara . Impression.

sanyasi or sayasin or sannyaasi or sannyaasin . One who has renounced the world and leads a solitary life of celibacy and asceticism.

shloka . A verse.

sitting . A session of meditation, usually lasting from twenty minutes to an hour, in which the guru or a Heartfulness trainer meditates with a group or an individual for the purpose of cleaning and transmission.

swami or swaami or swamiji swaameeji . Hindu priest; saint.

tavajjoh . A Sufi term describing a similar process to yogic transmission.

uparati . Self-­withdrawal.

yama . First step, or limb, of ashtanga yoga: self interdiction. Vow of abstinence of violence, falsity, robbery, unchastity, and tendency to acquire.

yoga . A system of philosophy and practice for the sake of uniting the lower self with the higher Self, or God.

yoganidra or yoganidraa . A yogi’s spiritual state during which they seem to be asleep but they are awake within.

yogi or yogin . One who practices yoga; one who achieves union with the Absolute.





Notes



Balasubramanian, K. S., Deputy Director of the Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute, Chennai, India, has kindly ­confirmed the accuracy of all Sanskrit references and trans­lations.

Chandra, R. 2009. Complete Works of Ram Chandra Volume I. Kolkata: Spiritual Hierarchy Publication Trust.

Vivekananda. 2009. Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda . Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama.





Kamlesh D. Patel , known widely as Daaji , is the fourth and current spiritual guide of the global Heartfulness movement. His teachings arise from his personal experience on the path of Heartfulness, while reflecting his deep spirit of inquiry and respect for the world’s great spiritual traditions and scientific advancements.

Daaji practiced pharmacy in New York City, NY, for over three decades before being named the successor in a century-old lineage of spiritual masters. Fulfilling the many duties of a modern-day guru, he travels widely, extending his support to spiritual seekers everywhere. A self-professed student of spirituality, he devotes much of his time and energy to research in the field of consciousness and spirituality, approaching the subject with scientific methodology—a practical approach that stems from his own experience and mastery in the field.

Joshua Pollock is a Heartfulness trainer and practitioner from the United States. An accomplished classical violinist, he has performed and taught throughout the world, including multiple collaborations with film composer A. R. Rahman. Pollock is a dedicated spiritual aspirant, and is enthusiastic about sharing his passion for meditation, frequently lecturing at private seminars; holding practical demonstrations in corporate, educational, and governmental settings; and providing ongoing individual support to local seekers. Pollock holds a bachelor of musical arts degree from Indiana University, and two master’s degrees from Guildhall School of Music and Drama in London, UK. He currently resides in India with his wife and their two children.

Foreword writer Varun Soni, PhD , is dean of religious life at the University of Southern California, where he also serves as vice provost for Campus Wellness and Crisis Intervention, adjunct professor of religion, and Annenberg Fellow of public diplomacy. He holds degrees in religion from Tufts University; Harvard University; the University of California, Santa Barbara; and the University of Cape Town; as well as a law degree from the University of California, Los Angeles.

Afterword writer James R. Doty, MD , is professor of neurosurgery at Stanford University School of Medicine, and founder and director of The Center for Compassion and Altruism Research and Explanation (CCARE). Doty is author of Into the Magic Shop , and editor of The Oxford Handbook of Compassion Science .





Introduction

Introduction

Introduction











